Fetched 2019-01

El demoledor [([1993](/year/1993/?ref_=tt_ov_inf))]{#titleYear}
===============================================================

Demolition Man[ (original title)]{.description}

13 [|]{.ghost} 1h 55min [|]{.ghost}
[Action](/search/title?genres=action&explore=title_type,genres&ref_=tt_ov_inf),
[Crime](/search/title?genres=crime&explore=title_type,genres&ref_=tt_ov_inf),
[Sci-Fi](/search/title?genres=sci-fi&explore=title_type,genres&ref_=tt_ov_inf)
[|]{.ghost} [11 November 1993
(Argentina)](/title/tt0106697/releaseinfo?ref_=tt_ov_inf "See more release dates")


A police officer is brought out of suspended animation in prison to
pursue an old ultra-violent nemesis who is loose in a non-violent future
society.

#### Director: {#director .inline}

[Marco Brambilla](/name/nm0104193/?ref_=tt_ov_dr)

#### Writers: {#writers .inline}

[Peter M. Lenkov](/name/nm0006997/?ref_=tt_ov_wr) (story), [Robert
Reneau](/name/nm0719427/?ref_=tt_ov_wr) (story) [|]{.ghost} [3 more
credits](fullcredits?ref_=tt_ov_wr#writers/) »

#### Stars: {#stars .inline}

[Sylvester Stallone](/name/nm0000230/?ref_=tt_ov_st_sm), [Wesley
Snipes](/name/nm0000648/?ref_=tt_ov_st_sm), [Sandra
Bullock](/name/nm0000113/?ref_=tt_ov_st_sm) [|]{.ghost} [See full cast &
crew](fullcredits/?ref_=tt_ov_st_sm) »


[ **Excellent cultural satire** ]{}

3 May 2005 | by [[BrandtSponseller]{}](/user/ur0139258/?ref_=tt_urv) –
[See all my reviews](/user/ur0139258/comments?ref_=tt_urv)

John Spartan (Sylvester Stallone) is a reckless Los Angeles policeman,
known as the "demolition man" for the destruction he routinely engenders
while apprehending big baddies. After a particularly ruthless criminal,
Simon Phoenix (Wesley Snipes), sets him up by making it appear that
Spartan wantonly caused the deaths of a bus load of hostages, Spartan is
sentenced to 60 years or so in prison. The film begins in a
not-too-distant future (relative to its 1992/1993 production date) of
1996. Prisons are quite a bit different, and there's a new policy of
cryogenically freezing inmates. We cut forward to 2032. Phoenix is up
for an obligatory parole hearing when he escapes. The film's 21st
Century society is extremely different (worsening cultural chaos,
exacerbated by a huge earthquake, precipitated the change), and the "San
Angeles" police cannot capture Phoenix or keep him in check. Chief Earle
makes a decision to revive Spartan, reasoning that an out of control but
effective cop mired in the ways of the late 20th Century may be the only
one who can capture the out of control criminal, but he, and the future
society, may be in for a lot more than they bargained for by reawakening
the Demolition Man.\
\
Demolition Man is one of the funniest, most action-packed and most
poignant social satires of at least the last 30 years. It's not
necessarily the easiest film to appreciate, as it makes its points
through extremely over-the-top "mindless" action and tongue-in-cheek,
purposefully cheesy plot and dialogue, but it's well worth trying to
acclimate oneself to the style if you're not an action or sci-fi fan, as
the satire cuts deep. There are other films with somewhat similar aims,
such as Total Recall (1990) and Starship Troopers (1997), which are
perhaps just as good as Demolition Man, but they certainly can't top it,
and they have aims other than the purely satirical.\
\
The opening scene feels like a typical late 1980s/early 1990s action
sequence. At least until we realize that there's not going to be a happy
ending for the hostages that Spartan is trying to save. Once we arrive
at the future, a lot of viewers might misjudge the performances of the
principal cast besides Stallone and Snipes. Sandra Bullock, as
Lieutenant Lenina Huxley (a reference to Aldous Huxley's book Brave New
World), and Benjamin Bratt, as Alfredo Garcia (a reference to Sam
Peckinpah's 1974 film, Bring Me the Head of Alfredo Garcia), at first
seem to be turning in bizarrely incompetent performances. It's only
later that we realize they are spot on for the film's "brave new world",
which is basically an instantiation of a staunchly moralist cult run by
Dr. Raymond Cocteau (a reference to famed director Jean Cocteau combined
with Cocteau's friend, novelist Raymond Radiguet).\
\
Technically, the film is quite impressive. The production design,
cinematography, effects, staging of the action sequences, score and
soundtrack are excellent. But what sets Demolition Man a cut above the
rest are the script and the performances--yes, even from Stallone and
Snipes, although Bullock, and especially Denis Leary, in a relatively
minor part where he gets to do his motor-mouthed, ranting comedy schtick
that made him famous, both threaten to steal the show.\
\
Director Marco Brambilla (who has remained oddly inactive since
Demolition Man, which was his first film) and his writing "team" skewer
a lot of cultural norms as relatively arbitrary conventions. Radio and
television commercial jingles are considered the pinnacle of musical art
in the film's world. Strict morality is enforced through constant
computer monitoring of behavior combined with fines--a running joke
throughout the film is that profanity results in fines. Meat and alcohol
have been outlawed. So has physical contact, including sex. All
restaurants are now Taco Bells (in some cuts of the film intended for
foreign markets, this was changed to Pizza Hut instead). There is an
underground, outside of the cultic mainstream society, but they're
literally underground, living relatively lawless (well, at least they
eat meat and drink beers) in tunnels strewn with utility pipes.\
\
As a result, serious crime is a thing of the past, swept under the rug
(or into the sewers) and labeled with Orwellian newspeak. Phoenix and
Spartan's reintroduction of violence and mayhem, including
"murder/death/kill", results in a reawakening of cultural freedom,
analogous to their own thawing out. The anti-utopian, anti-utilitarian
political message, like that of Orwell's 1984 and later films influenced
by the same, such as Equilibrium (2002), couldn't be clearer. And the
message can be extended to situations that are not political. I didn't
use "cult" above carelessly. The idea is that the society's warts are
necessary for individual authenticity. Yes, things can run smoother
under a dictatorship, but who wants to live under a dictatorship, even a
supposedly "benevolent" one?

------------------------------------------------------------------------


179 of 198 people found this review helpful.  Was this review helpful to
you?

Yes  
No

[Copyright ©](/conditions) 1990-2018 [IMDb.com,
Inc.](https://help.imdb.com/imdb?ref_=cons_ftr_imdb)
