The Contradiction of Rob Krar 
=============================

#### How a 37-year-old pharmacist became the country’s most feared ultramarathoner.

##### By [Noah Gallagher Shannon](https://www.runnersworld.com/author/211724/noah-gallagher-shannon/){.byline-name}

[Jun 30, 2014](https://www.runnersworld.com/advanced/a20793366/the-contradiction-of-rob-krar/)

In the summer of 2013, a then-36-year-old night pharmacist from
Hamilton, Ontario, entered the Western States Endurance Run, one of the
world’s most competitive 100-mile races. It would be the farthest he’d
ever run—by 50 miles.

If he finished, the race would take him and the 276 other participants
on a scrambling tour of the California high country. From the start at
Squaw Valley, the runners would arc west through the Sierra Nevada,
climbing some 18,000 total feet and descending 23,000 feet more, all the
way into the town of Auburn on the outskirts of Sacramento. For the
majority of the field, the most sought-after prize is a belt buckle
earned for finishing in 24 hours.

Barely 15 hours after the athletes disappeared into the mountains, the
pharmacist, Rob Krar, came running into view outside the finish at the
Placer High School track. He had second place firmly in hand, a mere 4
minutes and 38 seconds—the ultramarathoning equivalent of a photo
finish—behind two-time champ Timothy Olson.

“I have no idea where those 15 hours went,” Krar says. “I was just a
totally different being.”

His obscure racing history made the feat all the more confounding. There
wasn’t much evidence of his running before Western. He’d competed on an
athletic scholarship at Butler University and notched a 2:25 at Boston,
but these were footnotes rather than explanations. Traditionally, ultra
has had about as much to do with track and marathoning as downhill
skiing does with Nordic, although crossovers have become less rare.
Krar’s Grand Canyon Rim-to-Rim-to-Rim FKT (or fastest known time, a
world record of sorts for the trails) that spring may have turned some
heads, but the canyon’s 42 miles didn’t prove he’d survive 100.

Two weeks prior to that Grand Canyon crossing, Krar had competed in his
first 50-miler at the Leona Divide race. He won, broke the course record
and earned automatic entry into Western States.

“He just jumped in the most competitive 100,” Olson says, acknowledging
Krar’s decision to race Western, which came only eight weeks before the
start. “Definitely insane.”

Fans and other runners were hesitant to write it off as a fluke; like
open-ocean sailing or free climbing, there’s not a lot of beginner’s
luck in ultramarathoning. The distance is defined as any race longer
than 26.2 miles; the real ultra racing, according to die-hards, happens
after 60 miles, when—not unlike a mountaineer climbing in the “death
zone”—the runner is slowly dying.  

To lace up for Western is to enter running lore itself—the race’s
origins are as peculiar as the breed of people dotting its trails.
Originally the world’s pre-eminent horse endurance challenge, Western
States Trail Ride got its first two-legged competitor in 1974 when Gordy
Ainsleigh finished the race. By 1977, 14 men ran in the world’s first
100-mile footrace, and eventually more feet than hooves toed the
starting line.

Western would remain Krar’s sole loss for 2013. He went on to win his
next three races before hanging it up for the season in early December.
In a year that he completed his first 50-miler, then first 100 at
Western, he won five races and set two course records, collected
\$15,000 and bested most of his competition by margins of time almost
seismic. *UltraRunning* magazine named Krar its Male Ultrarunner of the
Year.

The North Face offered him a professional running contract last fall.
Between training and race appearances, it has amounted to a second job,
one he juggles between 10-hour graveyard shifts at a local pharmacy.

Unlike many professional runners, who often must acclimate to fame at a
young age, Krar had lived most of a normal adult life—doctorate, career,
house, marriage—before ever seeing his name in print. Already
self-effacing, he met the onslaught of attention with a series of
bashful quips. During dinner at home one evening in the early spring, a
plaque for Canadian Ultrarunner of the Year arrives with his picture. He
palms it like a cheap trinket and files it absentmindedly behind the
KitchenAid mixer, wondering aloud if a picture of him and his wife might
fit in the frame.

Krar’s reticence at first fit snugly into the idea that he’d come from
out of nowhere, a nearly middle-aged wunderkind. More Benjamin Button
than Bobby Fischer, Krar shared in everyone’s surprise, responding to
post-race interviews with clipped astonishment. Golly, it’s just great
to be here—yeah, as puzzled as you.

But by March of this year, Krar has eased off the aw-shucks humility.
Speaking from the townhouse he and his wife, Christina Bauer, share in
their adopted hometown of Flagstaff, Arizona, he says that, sure, the
attention was flattering, but the whole out-of-nowhere bit? That was
just another part of the ride—he knew he could compete well if he found
his niche in the sport.

Krar avoids or coyly dodges every question about why he races ultras.
Why he races at all, in fact. Because if it wasn’t from out of nowhere,
then where has it all come from?

Later that day, Krar runs some errands downtown, the snow-dusted peak of
Mount Elden rising 9,299 feet in the background. Dropping by Run
Flagstaff, the local running store, Krar chats with some buddies and,
raising his eyebrows, nods over at the wall. Above the shoe racks, the
owners have painted Krar and his now-famous beard, silhouetted against
him like a great fuzzy lobster bib, into their hall-of-fame mural.
Pointing out each runner in turn, Krar lands on himself last and says,
“And. There. I. Am.” The man and the image of the man, side by side.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7 "Rob Krar running in mountains")

[Alex Aristei]

**Krar grew up the younger of two boys in Hamilton, Ontario, a city
southwest of Toronto**. Larry, his father, taught elementary and middle
school. His mother, Carolyn, worked as a nurse. It was a tightknit,
middle-class family, which Krar dismisses with a wave of his hand:
“normal, happy.” Krar began training for triathlons in high school and
at 16 made the Canadian national team, traveling to New Zealand to race
in the world triathlon championships in 1994.

Like many Canadians, the Krars hoot out their OUs. When one speaks, the
other “mm-hmms” with approval. Recently retired and living in the
Okanagan Valley in rural British Columbia, Rob’s parents are
delightfully flummoxed about his success and, search as they might
through his past, they can’t account for its origins. They alternately
describe Rob as serious, gentle and free-willed. “Holy smokes, he can be
very stubborn,” says Larry, who now does volunteer maintenance on a
system of snowshoe trails he helped develop. “Rob’s never had a leader,”
Carolyn quickly adds.

At Butler, Krar focused on middle-distance and ended up training alone a
lot. “I’d run a fast 800 during winter track my freshman year,” he says,
“so I got designated a middle-distance guy.”

After studying biology his freshman year, he entered pre-pharmacy and
was accepted into the rigorous doctor of pharmacy program late in his
sophomore year. Friends warned him he couldn’t run and succeed
academically. “Hearing that,” Krar says, “my stubbornness was
responsible for me picking pharmacy as much as anything else.”

He graduated with what he felt were only modest PRs (1:51 for 800m; 3:44
for 1500m). Taking a well-paying job with Walgreens, Krar left Indiana
in 2002 and settled in Phoenix. He was soon assigned to the night
shift—9 p.m. to 8 a.m., seven days on, seven days off—a schedule he’s
now worked for more than a decade.

He signed a three-year contract, but things quickly fell apart. Krar and
his longtime girlfriend broke up, and he loathed Phoenix. He barely ran
for nearly three years.

Slowly stirring his double cappuccino in downtown Flagstaff, Krar has
all the trappings of the hipster mountain man—flannel, turquoise ear
gauges, Subaru out front—but he’s rail thin. You can see down to his
elbows when his cuffs are buttoned. At 5-foot-8, 130 pounds, with hazel
eyes, Krar looks, most of the time, stoically amused. Only occasionally
does he broaden his face, unearthing a mischievous smile.

And the beard? You could imagine a lot of old metal-heads raising a
glass. But the thing’s just wiry enough that you get flickering
projections of the handsome jawline below.

Historically, ultramarathoners have been built for the workload, more
loggers than trail runners. But Krar—chest thrust out, slight frame,
pitter-pattering up on his toes—is more like a beach extra in “Chariots
of Fire.” He’s rigid in the shoulders and back, but pliant and springy
below the belt. Watching his size 8.5 feet glance off rocks, there’s
something of an Irish dancer in him.

Krar’s rep around town pegs him as even-keeled, the model Canadian—all
alpha waves and positive vibes. Mike Smith, Krar’s old roommate in
Flagstaff and now the women’s cross country coach at Georgetown
University, says as much: “You watch Rob play with his cats—listening to
Natalie Merchant and Indigo Girls when he works out—just a soft soul.”

In conversation, Krar wanders through topics, darting suddenly when
curiosity strikes, then turning a subject over and over again. Almost
excessively deferring, he’s careful to keep a healthy conversational
ratio. When he does commandeer a subject—like climate change or sports
agents (Krar represents himself)—his questions typically outnumber his
opinions.

To some degree, Krar’s centeredness is typical for an ultrarunner. Like
the Sierra Club hosting a Burning Man fun run, ultras attract their
share of hippies and weirdos, basically anyone groovy enough to chance
kidney failure or losing all their toenails for a shot at a most
excellent runner’s high. Christopher McDougall, in his bestselling book,
*Born to Run*, compared one group of ultrarunners to beatniks: “... poor
and ignored and free from all expectations and inhibitions.”

Like other subcultures, ultrarunning is, at its heart, a crucible, a
place that feeds a deeper kind of addiction. Timothy Olson’s pitch was
simple—and unwittingly literal: “It’s so dope, dude.”

Against this backdrop, it’s easy to see how Krar has come to embrace
more of the “bearded mystique,” as his folks call it. And yet, unlike
his compatriots, Krar doesn’t appear particularly afflicted, or even
that battle-hardened. In fact, it seems Krar has become better at
competing at exactly the same rate as his personality relaxes.

Krar trains mostly by himself in Flagstaff, Ariz.

**In December 2005, Krar moved to Flagstaff**, a mountain hamlet famous
as a runner’s haven, thanks to its blood-thickening 7,000 feet of
altitude. There, Krar ventured into the Painted Desert and Grand Canyon,
tagging along on runs with local pros like Smith and Alicia Shay, now a
member of the Nike elite trail team. The idea of running a marathon
elbowed itself into his mind in early 2007, and he ran 100 miles that
week. A 2:25 at Boston, as well as a 1:06 half in Toronto, showed some
promise of a pro career, but injuries and his odd sleeping schedule soon
took their toll. He stopped running, again. 

A little more than a year later, in December 2008, Smith called Krar and
asked him to do TransRockies, a six-day team stage race covering 120
miles from Buena Vista to Beaver Creek, Colorado. Smith wasn’t sure that
Krar would agree, but he did. On the spot.

The race would turn out to be traumatic. “It destroyed my mind and body
for a long time,” Krar says. 

On the way to Colorado, Krar revealed to Smith that he hadn’t been
running in about a week. “My sciatic nerve was acting up,” Krar says.
“My heels hurt really bad. I could barely walk.”

Smith was ready to pack up and go home, but Krar pleaded with him to
line up anyway. Five miles in, Krar looked to be moving along, albeit
slowly, so Smith relaxed.

Secretly, each stage proved to be a nearly unnavigable labyrinth of pain
for Krar. “I remember lying down in a meadow,” he says, “just staring
up.” By then, they were well into the race’s lead, but Smith was
worried. He was physically pushing Krar up the later climbs. Near the
finish, Krar’s back finally gave out. His left leg seized up completely,
and he was forced to drag it the last half-mile. After winning, he went
straight to the emergency room.

In the spring, several months after TransRockies, Krar’s sciatic nerve
had finally healed, but he now needed surgery to repair Haglund’s
deformities on both heels (painful bony growths that push out on the
Achilles). “I scooted around the house in kneepads for a couple days,”
Krar says.

Smith knew this period was hard on Krar. But how hard, it was difficult
to say. “He’d never complain,” Smith says. “But when he’d watch me leave
for a run … I just felt really guilty.” There wasn’t much anyone could
do, either. “If something was ever wrong with Rob,” his mother, Carolyn,
says, “he’d never tell us.”

The only highlight of the episode was that Krar began seeing Christina
Bauer, a fellow competitor at TransRockies, and his infirmities meant he
could spend more time traveling to visit her in Salt Lake City. Bauer,
then a special education teacher, introduced Krar to ski mountaineering
and rock climbing. He picked up fly-fishing. They went winter camping on
one of their first dates.

Long-limbed with an easy laugh, Bauer is carefully composed. Her outdoor
résumé reads like something out of Edward Abbey. Krar confesses he grew
the beard to impress her. “We both just knew right away,” Bauer says.
Instead of rings, they tattooed their feet as symbols of their union:
Bauer, a sego lily; Krar, an aspen grove near a snowy peak. 

At the time, Bauer didn’t think about Krar as a runner. “I knew he ran,”
she says, “but I only heard stories about his intensity.”

**Krar likes to spend his winter evenings ski mountaineering up Arizona
Snowbowl**, a ski resort just outside Flagstaff. With spring flurries
huddling around him during a March outing, he heads up the slope.

By necessity, Krar’s mileage during workweeks stays relatively low,
around 75. Krar runs more during his off weeks, as much as 110 miles,
which he does entirely by feel. He has no coach. “I don’t know why I
write down my mileage,” he says. “I’ve never looked at it.”

Once a week, Krar throws in a workout, usually long repeats at 5-minute
pace. Most days he runs on singletrack mountain trails and service
roads, but occasionally he ventures to the Grand Canyon for a
“quad-burner.”

Unlike many of his competitors, Krar doesn’t log his “vert,” or vertical
gain, for the week, but he does his homework when it comes to fueling
and preparing for key races on the schedule. This year, he’s planning on
Western States and the North Face Endurance Challenge Championship.

Krar’s training philosophy is the result of molding his running to the
contours of his work schedule. It also stems from his numerous
setbacks—especially in the aftermath of the 2009 TransRockies race. 
“That retrospective of defeat is something I never want to revisit,” he
says, adding, “All that time off: whew.”

So he did away with weekly mileage quotas, dropping the rigidity. Krar
wants to ensure that each morning, day after day, he is able to wake up
and, regardless of the intensity, get in a run. Or at least not lose
weeks and months to injury. “I’m not afraid of the days off,” Krar says.

If his new approach meant compromising a few minutes off the top of his
potential, fine. “I don’t risk the razor’s edge anymore,” he says. “The
consequences of reaching for those last few \[percentage points\] of
performance just aren’t worth it.”

That this plan has made him a worldbeater was a surprise that he shares
in with everybody else. He smirks at the irony but preaches his
philosophy like gospel.

By the time Krar reaches the top of the ski slope, it’s dark. Icicles
hang from his beard. He doesn’t rest long. After a gulp of water, he
peels the skins off his skis, locks his bindings in place and plunges
back down the mountain, into what is now a whiteout.

**In February 2012, more than two years after TransRock-ies**, Krar got
the urge to run again. Some friends entered Red Hot, a 33K trail run in
Moab, Utah, and Krar decided to test out his heels and back. He’d been
ski mountaineering to build fitness and figured if he took it easy his
body would hold up. He won the race, broke the course record and in
early March started running again in earnest.

Athletic confidence has always been like a snowball, amassing strength
slowly over distance and time. Krar remembers a moment when his emerged
whole, for a time, prior to his latest comeback. Smith was there, that
day in the Grand Canyon.

“It was always high anxiety when you enter the park,” Smith says of his
shared experiences with Krar. “Hands shaking, no talking. You park the
car, go to the bathroom, shed the layers. It’s freezing. It’s dark. You
go up to the rim. It opens up before you like you’re skydiving. Rob
says, ‘I can’t do it,’ goes off in the bushes and just starts crying.
Then he walks back over and says, ‘Let’s go,’ and, whoosh, we drop in.”

There’s no way out of the canyon. Whatever you get yourself into, you’d
better be prepared to get yourself out. When Krar made it out his first
time, he felt he was ready for anything. 

By the next fall, Krar had set a new Rim-to-Rim FKT (which still stands,
set prior to his double-crossing record) and represented Canada at the
World Mountain Running Championships in  Temù, Italy. After a decade of
false starts, Krar had finally put together a full season. The question
now was, how hard could he push it?

Writer Haruki Murakami, himself a dedicated marathon-er, once described
running a 60-plus-mile race as going “into a blank state you might even
call philosophical or religious.” Murakami said he was never physically
nor mentally the same after finishing.

Krar had never heard of Murakami’s experience, chronicled in *What I
Talk About When I Talk About Running*, but he says for him, it’s not a
blank state. It’s brimming with pain. Ultras force you onto a
hyperaware, hyperfocused plane. “I don’t meditate; I don’t practice any
faith,” he says, pausing, suddenly embarrassed by his dramatic tone. “I
get into this state where I’m intensely focused on my body, my
breathing.”

His mouth curls at the corners: “I just love making myself hurt.”

Krar explains that races aren’t about competitors. They’re about
reaching inside and feeling out the seams of his character.

“I love, I love, I love going to that dark place at the end of a race,”
he says.

Recently, at the Lake Sonoma 50, with less than 5 miles to go, Krar
reeled in Sage Canaday to grab second. But that’s not what had him
jazzed after the race. “I had probably my worst patch ever in an ultra,”
he says, “from just after midway to about 5 miles to go—just damn
miserable.” Krar called the race “fascinating.”\
This kind of dark place is accessible in races like Lake Sonoma, where
the real depths of suffering reveal themselves.

He calls that place “the Cave.”

What’s inside the Cave?

Krar’s euphoria suddenly buckles. Tears pool in his eyes.

“I’ve struggled with depression for a long time,” Krar says. “I guess it
started sometime in college.”

He simply wrote the episodes off as stress. Even later, as a clinician,
Krar still didn’t perceive his suffering as anything more serious, all
the while administering prescription drugs to clients in similar pain.

“I tried not to put much thought in it,” he says, “but it got so bad it
was very obvious.” He’d lie in bed for multiple days in a row. “No
matter how much you want to deny it, it gets to a point where, yup, yup,
something’s fucked up here.

“I’ll do my best to try to fight it off,” he says, “but it almost feels
good now. I just accept it and crawl in bed.” He says it will probably
worsen as he ages.

What it is exactly, he doesn’t know. Despite his intellect, Krar is
generally resistant to self-analysis. “I don’t understand it,” he says,
“which is the frustrating part.”

Krar walks back through his past, pointing out potential culprits, but
denies any kind of manifesting trauma. To him it’s just bad brain
chemistry, and he hasn’t sought treatment.

He speculates about the clangor of modern culture and the downward
spiral of the environment and how they probably contribute to his
depression. “I’m thinking about everything and nothing at the same
time,” he says.

Bauer feels Krar is simply too hard on himself, allowing all that
“everything” and “nothing” to go on infinite spin cycle. She thinks
perhaps one day her husband could benefit from therapy (she’s a school
counselor), but she knows running helps. When he’s able to go out and
punish himself on the trails, he’s a better man and, he feels, a better
husband.

Smith agrees that running makes Krar better, but in a more tangible way.
“Regardless of what’s haunting him, you have to race that dark side. And
good luck, because when you’re beside him, sawing away at a mountain,
there is a very cold, hard side of that dude. It’s terrifying,” he says.
“He’s like a killer.”

“No doubt,” Krar says. “I wouldn’t be winning these races without that
dark place.

“I wouldn’t wish it upon anyone else, because it’s suffering,” he says,
his voice growing more defiant, “but when I race, I sink hard in the
hole, and I want to be there.” 

**The next morning, after seeing Bauer out the door**, Krar stretches
for his morning run. Fleet Foxes harmonize softly as his cats, Bee and
Mo, both rescues, mew around his feet. There is a demanding workout on
the day’s docket, more than 10 miles of race-pace repeats over
undulating trails. But Krar doesn’t dwell on the coming onslaught. “I
don’t get nervous anymore,” he says, rolling a tennis ball back and
forth under his foot.

It’s 10 a.m. Time to go.

Krar strips down to his shorts, laces up his minimalist shoes and pecks
at his watch. In silence, he jogs up to Buffalo Park, a system of gravel
trails spread atop a grassy mesa, a favorite workout spot among area
pros. A dusting of snow covers the ground.

An hour later, as the desert sun climbs to its meridian, Krar bursts
into his final repeat. The snow is gone. He tosses his long-sleeve shirt
in the grass. The mountain air comes cool and rich with juniper.

Curving away from the mountains, the trail uncoils into a parallel line
under the horizon. Hovering along it, his figure framed in miniature
against the sky above, Krar works his legs in tight, jabbing steps.
Ahead, the trail descends into a steep gulch tucked among ponderosa
pine.

Krar opens up, hammering into the downhill. As he dips below the
skyline, he appears, for a moment, cut in half at the waist. Then he
disappears completely.
