In the Grand Canyon With Lance 
==============================

[ Jenn Shelton ]{.aurtot-name} June 18th, 2015

Jenn Shelton, ultrarunning legend Connie Gardner and the enigmatic Lance Armstrong bond on a desert adventure
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grand-odyssey.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6208 width="419" height="279"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grand-odyssey.inart.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grand-odyssey.inart-300x200.jpg 300w"}\
[Gazing at the falls. Photo by Ken Etzel]{.credit}

**It begins** with a text exchange.

*I need an adventure,* texts Connie.

*Grand Canyon?* I respond.

*Ok, But not rim-to-rim again.*

*How’s Mark?*

*Mark who?*

In truth, it begins with a break up. Followed by a text. For the better
part of a decade, Connie Gardner and I have tempered our tumultuous love
lives by meeting up across the country for trail-running adventures. The
protocol is always the same: we decide on a place to run, she flies in
from Ohio and—depending on the mechanical condition of my car—I either
drive or fly in from whatever mountain town I’m living in. Between the
two of us we can count on at least one trip a year, upwards of three in
a bad year. As riddled with drama as our romantic relationships are, so
follow our trail runs.

We’ve nearly killed ourselves searching for quicksand in Death Valley,
only to find out later from a scientific source that there is no
possibility of quicksand in Death Valley. (We still fight about who came
up with that idea.) We’ve run for 48 hours without food in California’s
John Muir Wilderness, during which we had synchronized
hallucinations—everything from black panthers to elaborate yurt villages
to cheese omelets lying in the middle of the trail. We’ve gotten so
lost, so many times, that we now carry a whistle. Not a map and compass,
because those aren’t nearly as fun.

 

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grand-odyssey-crew.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6209 width="419" height="200"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grand-odyssey-crew.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grand-odyssey-crew-300x143.jpg 300w"}\
[Left to right: Jenn Shelton, Lance Armstrong, Connie Gardner. Photos by
Ken Etzel]{.credit}

 

**She calls me “Lil’ Thumper”** and I call her my “Great Ox.” Her trail
name is less a jab at her broad, linebacker shoulders than a term of
endearment. Even though she lives at sea level in Medina, Ohio, Connie
can muscle through any mountain terrain, without training for altitude
or elevation. Clocking in at exactly 20 years my senior, Connie pulls
her seniority card to claim the lead on every one of our runs. Although
you’d never guess it from her running resume—over the course of her
ultrarunning career she’s won 14 national-championship titles, and, in
2012, at the age of 49, set the American record for 24 hours—she suffers
from arthritis and prefers to stay in front on the trail so she doesn’t
have to watch me, as she says, “hop up and down rocks like an obnoxious,
bunny-rabbit asshole.”

I’m always happy to follow, never ceasing to be amazed at her consistent
pace. Whether we’re climbing a 14er or descending a scree field, she
bulldozes across trails, chugging along with the belabored efficiency of
a push lawn mower, my young legs spinning behind in a faster, easier
gear, two springing steps to her every grinding, boring one.

Trail running may be our self-medication, but that doesn’t mean we take
it too seriously. We spend our runs talking trash and joking and
bickering like sisters, never indulging in any talk therapy, which is
how we both prefer it. We aren’t looking for metamorphosis, only
release.

Connie and I love and need the outdoors as much as anyone; the trails
are our sanctuary, but much in the way that recess is a sanctuary for a
kid.

I run with Connie because she’s never going to feign a religious
experience alongside a mountain sunrise. She’s not going to cry at the
sight of a dew-covered meadow or write a premeditated piety in a summit
register. We’ve summited enough peaks together to know that most are
cold, windy and miserable places to linger. Anyone who says that they
are pillars of enlightenment is either a liar or a damn fool.

With Connie I know we will simply run wild and tough through wild and
tough places. No proselytizing or overanalyzing. In our adventures we’re
only looking to laugh and to tire ourselves out. To run outside in a
world that is too big to talk about.

All planning transpires completely over text, in a metaphor-heavy
language that no one else would understand, one that we’ve developed
over the years, like a secret handshake. I know she’s serious when she
sends me a picture of a box of Oreos. Before they are launched in a
national market, limited-edition Oreos are first crowd tested in Ohio.
Every breakup gets a new flavor profile.

I preface my text to Connie with a pic of Root Beer Float Oreos:

*There’s a trail called Havasupai. I got a guidebook. Thirty-six miles.*

*Is it technical?*

*Not at all.*

*I can’t risk twisting my ankle.*

*I just said it’s not technical. I wish they’d make Mountain Dew Oreos.*

*That would be too perfect. The world would implode.*

 

**At 36 miles** round trip, it is our shortest adventure to date. Connie
has to compete in the 24-hour World Championships in Italy the following
week and doesn’t want to do anything over 50 miles, lest it tire her
legs. I personally wouldn’t run anything over an hour the week before my
target race of the year, but Connie isn’t human. She’s a stock animal.
If I were a better friend, I would convince her to take a rain check on
this little expedition. But I’m not a better friend.

I’ve been hearing about Supai (population: 639), a mythical Indian
village nestled deep inside a southern tributary of the Grand
Canyon—accessible only by horse or foot—for too long to pass up a chance
to run there while it was still off the main radar for tourism. I’d
descended into the “big ditch” many times from the traditional
jumping-off point in Grand Canyon Village, an outdoor mecca that sees
five million visitors a year, and I’d grown weary of yelling, “On your
left!” to heat-exhausted hikers who either move to the left and nearly
bump me off a cliff, or turn around and chuckle, “What are you running
from?” or some other salutation non-runners seem to think is hilarious
in its originality, though we’ve all heard it a thousand times.

 

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey7.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6210 width="419" height="279"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey7.inart.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey7.inart-300x200.jpg 300w"}\
[The Havasupai Trail. Photo by Ken Etzel]{.credit}

The access point to Supai is Hualapai Hilltop, 191 miles from the
circus, and this remote trailhead, regulated by the Havasu tribe (Ha
means “water,” vasu means “blue green” and pai means “people”), allows a
much-more-reasonable 25,000 visitors annually. From the hilltop you
descend eight miles to the village and from there the trail follows
milky-blue creeks and sapphire waterfalls taller than Niagara Falls, all
the way down to the Colorado river—or so I’ve heard. I’ve never known
anyone who has run past the big waterfalls. I have a guidebook that says
there’s a trail all the way to the confluence with the Colorado, but
it’s a canyoneering guidebook, and “trail” in those circles can mean
anything. I tell myself that this trail is just what Connie needs to get
her head straight before the Worlds.

I know that Connie will be grumpy if the trail is rocky, and I have a
good hunch that the trail is probably not well maintained in the eight
miles between the waterfalls and the river. We need a buffer, another
person to come along, someone Connie respects, so she will have to be on
her best behavior and not yell at me if things get dicey. A person who
will fit in: someone who won’t want to talk about feelings, a person who
will appreciate the canyon without needing to wax poetic about the
beauty. An irreverent asshole\
like ourselves.

*Can I invite Lance?*

*Jenn. Nobody believes that you are friends with Lance Armstrong.*

*I’m inviting him.*

*Sure you are.*

 

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey4.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6211 width="419" height="279"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey4.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey4-300x200.jpg 300w"}\
[Photo by Ken Etzel]{.credit}

 

**We pull up** to the Grand Canyon Caverns Inn at dusk. Dinosaur
sculptures two stories high are littered across the property—bright
green Stegasauruses, sad relics from the era of lead-based paint. The
address is Mile Marker 115, Route 66. There’s no town, and the adjacent
convenience store and—most tragically—watering hole that accompany the
motel are closed this early in the spring. Behind the lobby is what
looks to be about 50 barracks, a row of concrete blocks with doors
standing maybe seven feet high. We’ve pulled into an abandoned carnival
in the middle of the desert.

“We are not staying here,” says Lance.

“It’s the closest hotel to the rim. And I already paid.”

“Connie, this bitch is crazy if she thinks we are staying here. Am I
right?”

“She wants us to catch a disease.”

Lance and Connie met for the first time this morning at the Phoenix
airport, but during the four-hour car ride to the canyon they bonded
enough to create an endlessly fun game of ganging up on me. We unload
our gear, and Lance joins us in our hotel room.

“Connie, you’re the only one I can trust here. Tell me what I need to
bring on this trail.”

Connie looks down at her bed, a jumble of gels, socks, Oreos and
unsorted gear. She picks up a small spray can called TriSlide and tosses
it to Lance.

“You’re gonna need this. The spray is better than the lotions.”

“Where am I supposed to spray it?”

Connie looks at Lance like he’s the biggest idiot to ever walk the face
of the earth. “On your balls.”

“Ball,” Lance corrects her.

“Huh?” Connie asks.

“Ball.”

Connie still doesn’t get it. Lance has to fill her in about what he has
affectionately dubbed Juan Pelota, JP for short. It’s a play on words,
the surname being the Spanish word for ball. It’s also the name of the
coffee shop connected to the bike shop he owns in Austin.

 

**Once we have** our packs and anatomy sorted out, we drive 40 miles
down the road to Peach Springs, for something to do. For beer. There’s a
nice hotel in Peach Springs, and it even has a pool, meaning that the
Grand Canyon Cavern Inn’s claim to be the “closest accommodations to the
Hualapai Hilltop” is a flagrant lie. We are in the Wild West, where
reliable information is variable at best.

We are not sure if we will even be able to start the run tomorrow. My
guidebook says we can buy our trail permits once we descend into Supai
village, but the receptionist at the inn warned us that permits are
reservation only and we’ll be turned around at the trailhead by the
tribe before setting one foot in the canyon. Seeing that there is a
hotel closer to the trail than ours makes me confident that Grand Canyon
Caverns Inn is full of shit, and that we will be fine with buying
permits tomorrow. I voice this vote of confidence.

“This is the last trip we let you plan,” says Lance, and Connie seconds
his sentiment. The glee in her eyes makes me wonder what would make her
happier: running the trail or watching me waste Lance’s weekend.

We decide that it will be safest to start our run before sunrise, before
the tribe starts regulating the rim. It will be a 4 a.m. wake up from
our current hotel, or 4:45 a.m. if we stay in Peach Springs.

Lance makes an executive decision and goes into the Peach Springs hotel
to get us rooms while Connie and I wait in the car. He comes back
shaking his head.

“No vacancy.”

“You couldn’t pull any strings?” asks Connie.

“I told you, ladies. I’m in disguise.” Lance has grown out a beard since
I saw him last fall. He insists that his new beard, coupled with a ball
cap, makes him unrecognizable.

 

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey6.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6212 width="419" height="419"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey6.inart.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey6.inart-150x150.jpg 150w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey6.inart-300x300.jpg 300w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey6.inart-261x261.jpg 261w"}\
[Lance, “incognito.” Photo by Ken Etzel]{.credit}

Lance’s belief that a splotchy nest of facial hair lends him anonymity
is an absurd delusion. He is one of the most famous people on earth, so
famous that even my mother, a lady whose last celebrity crush was Pacey
from “Dawson’s Creek,” knows his tale: from cancer survivor, to
champion, to his latest fall from grace. Well, she knows the gist of the
tale.

Early last fall I called my mom while driving south—she refuses to
text—to let her know I was headed to Austin for the next few months to
finish a book project.

“But, sweetie, do you know anyone who lives in Austin?”

“Not really. But I texted Lance Armstrong, and he agreed to be my
training partner.”

A pregnant pause followed. When she finally spoke, she didn’t ask any of
the obvious questions: how I’d come to know Lance, or why he’d be
slumming it with the likes of me, or how the book was coming along (she
knew better than to ask), or how I was going to survive away from the
mountains, or—tragically—if I needed to borrow any money for the move.

Instead, she whispered, “But sweetie, how can he keep up with you?
Doesn’t he only have one leg?”

 

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey8.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6213 width="419" height="279"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey8.inart.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey8.inart-300x200.jpg 300w"}\
[Photo by Ken Etzel]{.credit}

 

**I’d never run with Lance** before moving to Austin, but I was fairly
certain he would have very little trouble keeping up with me, even with
a peg leg.

I knew he was a decent runner. Like the rest of the country, I’d watched
him run his first marathon, a 2:59 in the 2006 New York Marathon. I
remember his New York race clearly because at the time I was working at
a specialty running store, and we started a pool to predict his time.
Always the optimist, I bet on 2:20 or faster, and became \$15 poorer in
the process.

But had I known that New York was one of the worst performances of his
life—had I known that he was a 15-minute 5K runner in high school, or
that at the age of 40 he’d won the 2012 Ironman 70.3 Florida, posting a
1:15 half-marathon after averaging 28 mph on the bike—then I probably
would have never asked him to run with me, a 1:20 half-marathoner on
fresh legs. Two of them.

I was surprised that he had agreed to train with me, as I’d only met him
once before, at a party in his home in Aspen last summer. It was my
friend Rickey Gates who had introduced us. Rickey had invited Lance to
join us for a hut trip that we were guiding, a six-day run that started
in Aspen and took runners 100 miles through the Rocky Mountains to Vail.
A self-proclaimed “princess,” Lance declined the offer to join us after
learning that most of the huts along the route only had communal
sleeping options. To make up for not joining us, he instead hosted a
party for us and all of our guests at his house the night before we left
Aspen.

 

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey13.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6214 width="419" height="279"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey13.inart.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey13.inart-300x200.jpg 300w"}\
[Photo by Ken Etzel]{.credit}

**We were in his kitchen**, and it was late. I was drunk. Everyone was,
but everyone had left. We’d polished off a bottle of mescal, and then
the guests had gone to their hotels to get some rest. All that remained
were Lance, Anna—Lance’s stunningly beautiful and gracious
girlfriend—Rickey and myself. Lance opened a bottle of white wine, but
after one sip decided he didn’t like it. He moved on to red. I was
reminded of those times at fancy restaurants when they let you taste the
wine and decide if you like it. I’d always wondered if anyone ever
actually turned up their nose and sent the wine back. Was Lance, with
his down-home Texas accent and good-natured smile, one of those people?

I parked myself beside the discarded wine and poured myself a glass,
telling myself it was possible that the discarded wine in my hand was
worth more than my car. Of course, a blue book was probably worth more
than my car, so that wasn’t saying much.

I was completely out of place in the multi-million-dollar home in Aspen,
as I was at the time actually living out of my aforementioned car for
the summer and couldn’t remember my last shower. I was blind drunk and
under the bright kitchen lighting was suddenly self-conscious of the
dirt under every single one of my fingernails. I tried to politely
listen to the conversation between Lance and Rickey, who were recounting
a recent 26-mile run they had done together called the Four Pass Loop, a
classic Aspen trail run. But really I wanted to disappear into the
folded-down back seats of my car, do a quick wet-wipe bath of my
important pieces and get some rest before six long days of work.

“Are you a fast runner?” A slurred drawl shook me out of my reverie. I
looked up from my wine. Was Lance talking to me? He was.

“Not really.”

“I don’t believe you.”

“When you ran your first marathon, I bet \$15 you would break 2:20. You
ran 2:59.”

I don’t know where I was going with this, as social fluidity has never
been my strong point. Maybe I was embarrassed to talk about my haphazard
running career to someone who was once considered the greatest endurance
athlete the world has ever seen. More likely I was still pissed, nine
years after the fact, that he lost me \$15. At least I didn’t ask him if
he’d ever sent back wine in a restaurant.

“Give me five months and I could break 2:20,” Lance answered, not
missing a beat.

I didn’t know what to do. Should I, a greasy girl with dirty
fingernails, tell Lance Armstrong what I really thought: that there
wasn’t a chance in hell he could do that at age 42? Luckily, Rickey
saved me.

“Six months, and if you lost 30 pounds.”

“Fifteen pounds,” said Lance.

“Thirty,” said Rickey.

Lance looked down at what he calls his “burger belly” and smiled. It was
a smile I didn’t even know that I’d seen before until that moment—a
smile that all of America smiled alongside every July for seven years.
Boyish and mischievous, resting below a set of hardened blue eyes. A
visage so unmistakable that no beard or baseball cap could ever disguise
it.

“Alright, 30,” he conceded.

 

**It’s a moot argument** whether Lance can run a 2:20 marathon, because
he isn’t allowed on the starting line. After being issued a lifetime ban
from sanctioned races, including cycling, triathlons and road running,
Lance has taken to trail running. Lacking an over-riding governing body
that could issue a sweeping ban on competition, the trails offered a
clemency of sorts. In 2012, he won the inaugural Steamboat Stinger Trail
Marathon in Steamboat, Colorado, and he’s asked me so many questions
about many of the well-known team stage races—including TransAlps,
TransRockies and South America’s El Cruce—that it’s hard to imagine
he’ll sit on the sidelines much longer.  He once told an interviewer
something to the effect of, “I’m a kid who is forced to sit out at
recess.”

I’ve always loved the oddball community of trail running, a sport that
opens its arms to dropouts and misfits and even shit shows like Connie
and myself. It’s a sport as American as the Emma Lazarus poem, “The New
Colossus,” on the Statue of Liberty:

 

*Give me your tired, your poor,*

*Your huddled masses yearning\
to breathe free,*

*The wretched refuse of\
your teeming shore.*

*Send these, the homeless,\
tempest-tost, to me,*

*I lift my lamp\
beside the golden door!*

Fancy words aside, trail running is the only sport that will allow Lance
to compete, which is how he came to be slumming it in the Grand Canyon
with none other than Lil’ Thumper and her Great Ox.

 

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey12.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6215 width="419" height="279"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey12.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey12-300x200.jpg 300w"}\
[Photo by Ken Etzel]{.credit}

 

**Of course** everyone and their mother—except maybe mine—has an opinion
on whether Lance Armstrong, or any convicted doper, should be allowed to
compete in trail races. I’ve heard him called a philanthropist and a
misanthrope, an inspiration and a disgrace, a tragic hero and a
sociopath, a scapegoat and an evil mastermind. Diehard Lance fans
believe his presence would bring more popularity to the fringe sport of
trail running, but that argument makes me uncomfortable; I’ve never gone
for a run and thought, “Gee, I wish this trail were more popular.”
Purists believe his presence would taint the very essence of trail
running, but I’ve never met a purist who was any bit fun—which, to me at
least, is the very essence of trail running.

Whatever someone’s opinion about Lance, I don’t expect, or want, to
influence it. All I can say is that while I spent a miserable fall in
Texas, sitting in the dark recesses of my imagination working on a book,
missing the mountains and my friends, the only bright spot of each day
was our morning runs. All the runs were too fast and rarely lasted more
than an hour. We didn’t talk about book deadlines or \$100 million
lawsuits; we just ran and laughed and—like all my relationships—when our
run ended we went our separate ways.

During my brief stint in Austin, which we referred to as “training
camp,” Lance would always choose the route and the pace, and of course
he would always take the lead. I had a hard time keeping up, but it was
my favorite type of running: I got to turn off my mind and follow the
person in front of me. I’d never pay attention to the routes, but I’d
know that a run was almost over when Lance would say his endearing line,
“Bitch, Ima drop you right now.” That signaled our finishing sprint.
Although Lance will swear up and down that he doesn’t have any speed, he
outkicked me every single time except one. My one victory came after he
showed up to the trailhead hung over, because he’d spent the night
before drinking and playing poker with Willie Nelson. If I ever have the
chance to meet Willie, I’m going to buy him a beer.

Lance Armstrong’s name brings up a lot of different emotions to a lot of
different people, but to me his name will always bring up the most
sacred of all associations: a morning run before a miserable day of
work.

 

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey10.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6216 width="419" height="279"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey10.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey10-300x200.jpg 300w"}\
[Photo by Ken Etzel]{.credit}

**“Don’t touch me!”** Connie yells, donkey-kicking her heel free from my
grip. She’s facing the wall for better traction and can’t see what she’s
doing with her feet, but if I didn’t know better I’d swear she was
aiming straight for my head.

“I am trying to help you,” I scream back. I grab her heel, which is
lashing wildly over the ledge, and shove her toe into a solid foothold.
I see her body relax, or as close as a person this gripped can get to
relaxing.

The spray from the 206-foot falls has left us and the rock face we’re
descending drenched, and although she knows better than to look down,
she can’t help herself. Connie pries her face from the wall and cranes
her neck to make her voice heard over the thundering falls. She looks
panicked, a kitten in a bath—all claws and not one shred reason.

“You knew about this didn’t you, you little witch?”

“No,” I say, and this time I am telling the truth. I had no idea the
trail would be this awesome. “And you shouldn’t yell at the person
helping you.”

“Did she know it would be like this?” Connie looks halfway up the cliff
side to where Lance is standing on a railroad tie, one hand grabbing
onto a notch in the wet slab and the other holding his phone.

“Girl fight,” he says. “I gotta film this.”

 

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey11.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6217 width="419" height="279"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey11.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey11-300x200.jpg 300w"}\
[Photo by Ken Etzel]{.credit}

We finally coax Connie down the cliff, one donkey kick and laborious
foothold at a time. Havasu Falls, the showcase of the trail, dumps 38
million gallons of blue-green water per day over her shores, creating a
swirling wind chill at her bottom pools that—enshrouded by the steep
canyon walls—is as ferocious as any summit winds I’ve ever felt.
Immediately, I’m freezing, despite the 90-degree temperatures that have
followed us down the canyon all morning.

“Turkey’s done,” Connie says, pointing at my chest. I suppose
complimenting my nipple strength is her way of thanking me for helping
her down the trail.

“In and out, ladies,” says Lance who, coming from Texas, is also covered
in goose flesh.

We leave the shores of the sacred waterfall without taking so much as a
picture. We’ll be back later in the day, and all of us are anxious to
get to the river, to see what lies ahead. Lance has never run farther
than 26.2 miles, Connie doesn’t want to twist a knee and I don’t want to
get gang-blamed for whatever is about to go wrong.

 

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey5.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6218 width="419" height="279"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey5.inart.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey5.inart-300x200.jpg 300w"}\
[Photo by Ken Etzel]{.credit}

 

**Until the dramatic** **drop** down to Havasu Falls, the trail has been
fairly smooth sailing, at least technically. We got an early enough
start to avoid any permit issues at the Hilltop, and by the time we
descended the 10 smooth miles to Supai Village, the shanty tourism
office had yet to open for the day. We passed through the sleepy village
without any issue, vowing to stop on the return trip and pay our
\$80-a-piece entrance fees. I began to question whether I wanted to pay
a permit fee as we passed pasture after pasture filled with horses whose
ribs were protruding. Without any roads into the village, the horses are
worked hard, I’d been told, but it was still a harsh reality for a girl
who winters in white-bred mountain towns.

It wasn’t until a mile outside of town that we came across a brown horse
lying on its side beside the trail, malnourished, breathing in shallow
rapid bursts, abandoned to die. Connie squatted down beside the horse
and softly stroked the white stripe on its nose, starting at its cowlick
and ending at its flaring nostrils. Lance and I looked on in horror.
I’ve always had some intellectual notion that paradise comes at a price,
but I didn’t know if I wanted to be the financial backer for this sort
of abuse.

“We’re not paying the permit fee on the way out,” I said.

“Yes, we are,” said Connie, still petting the horse.

Dispute settled.

 

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey14.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6219 width="419" height="279"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey14.inart.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey14.inart-300x200.jpg 300w"}\
[Photo by Ken Etzel]{.credit}

**Now, searching for cairns** in the deserted, overgrown slot canyon cut
by a turquoise creek—miles past the fabled town with the famous
waterfalls—the world of permits and animal abuse and book deals and
grand-jury investigations and asshole boyfriends is all but erased. All
that matters is staying on the trail and making it to the river. The
cairns are our only guides, and, like everything in this distant part of
Arizona, they provide conflicting, if not outright misleading,
information.

We quickly realize that a stack of rocks could either signify that we
need to cross the creek or merely be a confidence booster, letting us
know that we are on the right path. Since the trail markers could mean
that we need to travel in essentially any of the cardinal directions,
every time I see a cairn I use it as a chance to get in the water and
cool off. Connie is visibly annoyed with the unmaintained trail, I’m
melting and Lance is getting hyper conscious of the total distance that
we will have to run today, which now looks to be nearly 40 miles. He
tells me the moment his GPS hits 18 miles, and we think we must be near
the confluence of the Colorado, our halfway point. When his GPS hits 20
miles and still there’s no sign of this canyon’s end, I wonder if we
should just turn around. It’s not like we’re climbing a mountain, we’re
descending an inverted one. There’s no real sense of accomplishment in
reaching the river.

“Don’t follow me, it’s deep here,” I yell from the middle of the creek,
once again fooled by a cairn.

“I ain’t gettin’ JP wet,” Lance yells back. “Yo. Found the trail over
here.”

Instead of continuing down the trail, Lance wades out and offers a hand
to pull me out of the creek, where I’m stumbling on the wet rock, trying
to negotiate the current and make my way back to the shore. Connie plods
by us at her metronome pace, taking the lead for the first time all day.
The trail climbs up the canyon wall, and she disappears around a bend to
the left. We’ve just gotten back onto the trail when we hear the shrill
sound of victory.

“River!” Connie screams from above.

Lance and I can’t believe it. For the past three miles we’ve been
sprinting around each turn in the trail, killing ourselves to be the
first to spot the Colorado. Slow and steady—unfathomably—the Great Ox
has won the race.

We reach Connie, who is stopped in the trail, ecstatic. “Look,” she
says, pointing down off the cliff. “It’s beautiful.”

She’s right. The creamy blue water of Havasu Creek spits out of a narrow
slot and into the roaring brown waters of the Colorado, two worlds
colliding, twirling together in eddies of contrasting blue and brown.
It’s like mixing two perfect and opposing life forces, the elusive
Mountain Dew Oreo finally come to fruition.

 

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey9.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-6220 width="419" height="279"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey9.inart.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grandodyssey9.inart-300x200.jpg 300w"}\
[Havasupai Falls. Photo by Ken Etzel]{.credit}

We scamper off the cliff and down to the river. We dive into the water
like kids in a candy land. The water is shallower than it looks where I
choose to dive, and I scrape my belly on the sand, bleeding. I don’t
care. No mountain summit has ever held this kind of excitement. We
splash each other in the swirling waters, and then in four quick strokes
Lance swims upstream, through the narrow slot and into the canyon.
Connie and I take turns trying to swim through the slot where the creek
water makes its final voyage before meeting the Colorado, but the
current is too strong. I get scared that when the current spits us out,
it will throw us all the way into the Colorado and we’ll be swept down
the river. The adrenaline gives me the strength to make it through. I
wait on the other side for Connie to muscle her way through the slot,
and the moment I see her blonde ponytail I grab on and pull her into the
calm sapphire pool that awaits on the other side.

We are in our own secret world, flanked by salmon-colored cliffs and the
bluest water in the world. Lance is standing on a sun-bleached boulder,
grinning. We still have to make the return trip home, over 20 miles back
to the Haulapi Hilltop. Next week Connie will have to run Worlds on
tired legs, I’ll still have an unfinished manuscript and Lance will
still be called a disgrace and a sociopath. But all that’s the past and
future. Right now, for a few minutes, this tiny pool of blue is our
home.

“This is the best day of my life,” Lance says. “The best place on
earth.”

“Better than Champs-Élysées?” asks Connie.

“Way fucking better.”

I can’t tell if he’s telling a flagrant lie or the truest of all truths.
And out here in the wild American West, I’ve come to prefer it that way.

 

*Jenn Shelton is a contributing editor for* Trail Runner, *living in
Durango, Colorado. This article originally appeared in our July 2015
issue.*

</div>

<div class="social-button row">

<div id="fb-root">

</div>

<div class="col-xs-6">

[Share **]{.fb .share_button}

</div>

<div class="col-xs-6">

[Tweet**](http://twitter.com/share?text=In%20the%20Grand%20Canyon%20With%20Lance&url=https://trailrunnermag.com/people/profiles/a-grand-odyssey-lance-armstron-jenn-shelton.html){.tw}

</div>

</div>

<div class="add">

<div id="div-gpt-ad-1482450657862-0">

</div>

</div>

<div class="reco-artical three-artical">

### Recommended Articles {#recommended-articles .head}

<div class="row">

<div class="col-xs-4">

<div class="artical">

[![](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/hellandback1.hz_-261x261.jpg?x39187){.img-responsive}](https://trailrunnermag.com/people/to-hell-and-back.html)
<div class="artical-content">

[To Hell and Back](https://trailrunnermag.com/people/to-hell-and-back.html) {#to-hell-and-back .head}
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="col-xs-4">

<div class="artical">

[![](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/RD.hz_-261x261.jpg?x39187){.img-responsive}](https://trailrunnermag.com/people/qas/race-director-john-storkamp-gets-candid.html)
<div class="artical-content">

[Race Director John Storkamp Gets Candid](https://trailrunnermag.com/people/qas/race-director-john-storkamp-gets-candid.html) {#race-director-john-storkamp-gets-candid .head}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="col-xs-4">

<div class="artical">

[![](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/FatherFKT.hz_-261x261.jpg?x39187){.img-responsive}](https://trailrunnermag.com/people/profiles/father-of-the-fastest-known-time.html)
<div class="artical-content">

[Father of the Fastest Known Time](https://trailrunnermag.com/people/profiles/father-of-the-fastest-known-time.html) {#father-of-the-fastest-known-time .head}
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="wpdiscuz_top_clearing">

</div>

<div id="comments" class="comments-area">

<div id="respond"
style="width: 0;height: 0;clear: both;margin: 0;padding: 0;">

</div>

### Leave A Comment {#wc-comment-header}

<div id="wpcomm" class="wpdiscuz_unauth wpd-default">

<div class="wpdiscuz-form-top-bar">

<div class="wpdiscuz-ftb-left">

<div id="wc_show_hide_loggedin_username">

</div>

</div>

<div class="wpd-clear">

</div>

</div>

<div class="wc_social_plugin_wrapper">

</div>

<div id="wc-main-form-wrapper-0_0"
class="wc-form-wrapper wc-main-form-wrapper">

<div class="wpdiscuz-comment-message" style="display: block;">

</div>

<div class="wc-field-comment">

<div class="wpdiscuz-item wc-field-textarea">

<div class="wpdiscuz-textarea-wrap">

<div class="wc-field-avatararea">

![avatar](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=40&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
.avatar-40 .wp-user-avatar .wp-user-avatar-40 .photo .avatar-default
width="40" height="40"}

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="clearfix">

</div>

</div>

<div class="wc-form-footer" style="display: none;">

<div class="wpd-form-row">

<div class="wpd-form-col-left">

<div class="wpdiscuz-item wpd-has-icon">

<div class="wpd-field-icon">

**

</div>

</div>

<div class="wpdiscuz-item wpd-has-icon">

<div class="wpd-field-icon">

**

</div>

</div>

<div class="wpdiscuz-item wpd-has-icon">

<div class="wpd-field-icon">

**

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="wpd-form-col-right">

<div class="wc-field-captcha wpdiscuz-item">

<div class="wc-captcha-input">

</div>

<div class="wc-label wc-captcha-label">

[![wpdiscuz\_captcha](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/wpdiscuz/captcha/ga3zA-15318804808853.png?x39187){.wc_captcha_img
width="80"
height="26"}](#){.wpdiscuz-nofollow}[![refresh](http://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/captcha-loading.png?x39187){width="16"
height="16"}](#){.wpdiscuz-nofollow .wc_captcha_refresh_img}

</div>

<div class="clearfix">

</div>

</div>

<div class="wc-field-submit">

[ [ [**[Notify of new replies to this comment -
(on)]{}]{.wpd-field-desc} [**[Notify of new replies to this comment -
(off)]{}]{.wpd-field-desc} ]{.wpd_label__check} ]{.wpd_label__text}

</div>

</div>

<div class="clearfix">

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="clearfix">

</div>

</div>

<div id="wpdiscuz_hidden_secondary_form" style="display: none;">

<div id="wc-secondary-form-wrapper-wpdiscuzuniqueid"
class="wc-form-wrapper wc-secondary-form-wrapper"
style="display: none;">

<div class="wpdiscuz-comment-message" style="display: block;">

</div>

<div class="wc-secondary-forms-social-content">

</div>

<div class="clearfix">

</div>

<div class="wc-field-comment">

<div class="wpdiscuz-item wc-field-textarea">

<div class="wpdiscuz-textarea-wrap">

<div class="wc-field-avatararea">

![avatar](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=48&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
.avatar-48 .wp-user-avatar .wp-user-avatar-48 .photo .avatar-default
width="48" height="48"}

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="clearfix">

</div>

</div>

<div class="wc-form-footer" style="display: none;">

<div class="wpd-form-row">

<div class="wpd-form-col-left">

<div class="wpdiscuz-item wpd-has-icon">

<div class="wpd-field-icon">

**

</div>

</div>

<div class="wpdiscuz-item wpd-has-icon">

<div class="wpd-field-icon">

**

</div>

</div>

<div class="wpdiscuz-item wpd-has-icon">

<div class="wpd-field-icon">

**

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="wpd-form-col-right">

<div class="wc-field-captcha wpdiscuz-item">

<div class="wc-captcha-input">

</div>

<div class="wc-label wc-captcha-label">

[![wpdiscuz\_captcha](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/wpdiscuz/captcha/xwzRK-15318804808893.png?x39187){.wc_captcha_img
width="80"
height="26"}](#){.wpdiscuz-nofollow}[![refresh](http://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/plugins/wpdiscuz/assets/img/captcha-loading.png?x39187){width="16"
height="16"}](#){.wpdiscuz-nofollow .wc_captcha_refresh_img}

</div>

<div class="clearfix">

</div>

</div>

<div class="wc-field-submit">

[ [ [**[Notify of new replies to this comment -
(on)]{}]{.wpd-field-desc} [**[Notify of new replies to this comment -
(off)]{}]{.wpd-field-desc} ]{.wpd_label__check} ]{.wpd_label__text}

</div>

</div>

<div class="clearfix">

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="clearfix">

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="wpdiscuz-front-actions">

<div class="clearfix">

</div>

</div>

<div id="wcThreadWrapper" class="wc-thread-wrapper">

<div class="wpdiscuz-comment-pagination">

</div>

</div>

<div class="wpdiscuz_clear">

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="wpdiscuz-loading-bar"
class="wpdiscuz-loading-bar wpdiscuz-loading-bar-unauth">

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="rightside new-artical-right col-xs-3 addSpacingBottom">

[share]{.share-text}
<div class="social-icon">

<div id="fb-root">

</div>

[]{.fb .share_button}
[](http://twitter.com/share?text=In%20the%20Grand%20Canyon%20With%20Lance&url=https://trailrunnermag.com/people/profiles/a-grand-odyssey-lance-armstron-jenn-shelton.html){.tw}
[](http://pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?url=https%3A%2F%2Ftrailrunnermag.com%2Fpeople%2Fprofiles%2Fa-grand-odyssey-lance-armstron-jenn-shelton.html&media=https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/grand-odyssey.inart.jpg&description=In%20the%20Grand%20Canyon%20With%20Lance){.pin}

</div>

<div class="add mgb firstBanner">

<div id="div-gpt-ad-1482450768751-0">

</div>

</div>

<div class="mgb mostpopular">

<div id="wpp-5" class="section">

<div class="artical-listing mgb">

Most Popular {#most-popular .head}
------------

<div class="listing">

###### [Trail Tips](https://trailrunnermag.com/training/trail-tips){.category .category-5}, [Training](https://trailrunnermag.com/training){.category .category-3} {#trail-tips-training .head}

[[The “I Feel Like Crap”
Checklist](https://trailrunnermag.com/training/understanding-down-days.html "The “I Feel Like Crap” Checklist"){.wpp-post-title}]{.text}

</div>

<div class="listing">

###### [Trail Tips](https://trailrunnermag.com/training/trail-tips){.category .category-5}, [Training](https://trailrunnermag.com/training){.category .category-3} {#trail-tips-training-1 .head}

[[Getting Out of Your Own
Way](https://trailrunnermag.com/training/trail-tips/getting-out-of-your-own-way.html "Getting Out of  Your Own Way"){.wpp-post-title}]{.text}

</div>

<div class="listing">

###### [Trail Tips](https://trailrunnermag.com/training/trail-tips){.category .category-5}, [Training](https://trailrunnermag.com/training){.category .category-3} {#trail-tips-training-2 .head}

[[What Matters (and What Doesn’t) Days Before a
Race](https://trailrunnermag.com/training/what-matters-days-before-a-race.html "What Matters (and What Doesn’t) Days Before a Race"){.wpp-post-title}]{.text}

</div>

<div class="listing">

###### [Training](https://trailrunnermag.com/training){.category .category-3}, [Workouts](https://trailrunnermag.com/training/workouts){.category .category-39} {#training-workouts .head}

[[3D Hip Mobility and Strength for Trail
Runners](https://trailrunnermag.com/training/three-dimensional-hip-mobility-and-strength-for-trail-runners.html "3D Hip Mobility and Strength for Trail Runners"){.wpp-post-title}]{.text}

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="add mgb firstBanner">

<div id="div-gpt-ad-1482450872613-0">

</div>

</div>

<div class="newslatter-sidebar">

<div class="subscribe">

<div id="previewWrapper">

<div id="LanguageDropdown" class="LanguageDropdown">

</div>

<div id="formContainer" class="formContainer">

<div id="SignupFormPreview" class="SignupFormPreview">

<div id="FormFieldsTable" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0">

<div id="Email4305618">

[TRAIL RUNNER NEWSLETTER]{#EmailLabel .SignupLabel}
<div id="FooterPreview">

</div>

<div id="btnSection">

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="footer-outer">

<div class="footer-logo">

[![logo](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/logo.png?x39187)](http://trailrunnermag.com)

</div>

<div class="footer-right">

<div class="ftop">

<div id="footer-menu">

<div class="menu">

[Race Director Account](https://trailrunnermag.com/director-submit-race)
[About Us](https://trailrunnermag.com/about-us)
[Advertise](https://trailrunnermag.com/trail-runner-advertising)
[Customer Queries](https://trailrunnermag.com/customer-queries)
[Contributors](https://trailrunnermag.com/contributors)
[Interns](https://trailrunnermag.com/interns)
[Terms Of Use](https://trailrunnermag.com/terms-of-use)
[Subscribe](https://trr.pcdfusion.com/pcd/Order?iKey=I**NEW)
[Retail Stores](https://trailrunnermag.com/retailers)
[Welcome to the 2018 Trail Runner Trophy
Series](https://trailrunnermag.com/trophy-series)

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="fbottom">

<div class="subscribe">

<div id="mc_embed_signup">

<div id="mc_embed_signup_scroll">

Subscribe to our mailing list
-----------------------------

<div class="indicates-required">

[\*]{.asterisk} indicates required

</div>

<div class="mc-field-group">

Email Address [\*]{.asterisk}

</div>

<div class="mc-field-group input-group">

**I would like to receive emails from:**
-   Trail Runner
-   Rock and Ice

</div>

<div id="mce-responses" class="clear">

<div id="mce-error-response" class="response" style="display:none">

</div>

<div id="mce-success-response" class="response" style="display:none">

</div>

</div>

<div style="position: absolute; left: -5000px;" aria-hidden="true">

</div>

<div class="clear">

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="social-icon">

[](https://www.facebook.com/pages/Trail-Runner-magazine/52704825212?sk=wall){.fb}
[](https://twitter.com/trailrunnermag){.tw}
[](https://www.pinterest.com/trailrunnermag/){.pin}
[](https://www.instagram.com/trailrunnermag/){.insta}

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

GDPR
<div id="myModal" class="modal custom_compliance">

<div class="modal-content">

GDPR compliance

By using this form you agree with the storage and handling of your data
by this website.
Please check the above box before Opt-in.

Opt-in
Opt-out

</div>

</div>

<div id="um_upload_single" style="display:none">

</div>

<div id="um_view_photo" style="display:none">

[**](#){.um-modal-close}
<div class="um-modal-body photo">

<div class="um-modal-photo">

</div>

</div>

</div>

[wpDiscuz]{#wpdUserContentInfoAnchor}
<div id="wpdUserContentInfo" class="lity-hide"
style="overflow:auto;background:#FDFDF6;padding:20px;width:600px;max-width:100%;border-radius:6px;">

</div>

</div>
