[richroll](https://byrslf.co/@richroll?source=post_header_lockup){.ds-link

Plantpowered ultra athlete; wellness advocate; family guy. Named one of
the 25 Fittest Guys in the World by Men's Fitness. Best-selling author
of FINDING ULTRA.

Mar 2, 2014[]{.middotDivider .u-fontSize12}[]{.readingTime
title="12 min read"}

Why You Should Stop Hacking Your Life and Invest in The Journey {#title .graf .graf--h2 .graf--leading .graf--trailing .graf--title name="title"}
===============================================================

Rich Roll

***“Maybe stop trying so hard to find shortcuts to “hack” your life. The
best things are hard. Invest in the journey. Just sayin’.”***

A lark of a [tweet](http://twitter.com/richroll){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor} I fired off last December that — somewhat to my
surprise — went semi-viral, shared across a variety of social networks
and blogs like wildfire.

Why is this surprising? And what does it say?

I was surprised because we live in such a meme, hashtag and shortcut
obsessed culture. And what is the trending topic of the day? The meme
that is beyond reproach, enjoying platinum status and irresistible
staying power in every corner of the Internet?

***The hack.***

*\#lifehack \#lifehacker \#biohack \#fitnesshack \#diethack \#fithack
\#weightlosshack — *and on and on, blah, blah, blah.

Go ahead and Google any derivation of the term and see what comes up.
It’s amazing, actually. There are even entire health, fitness, lifestyle
and technology *conferences* built around the idea.

Consistent with our shrinking attention span, demand for immediate
gratification, intolerance for hard work, rebuttal of experiential
value, and general (illusory) sense of entitlement to the *good life*,
this *hack ethos* is emblematic of our obsessive modern imperative for
immediacy — the drive to turbocharge, accelerate, optimize, scramble,
quicken and hasten our way to maximum health, fitness, professional
success and ultimately happiness. A hell-bent zeal to quick-fix
ourselves to overnight six-pack abs, envious wealth, limitless free
time, and in some ways I suppose, salvation. *Finger-snap your way to
nirvana. Don’t just keep up with The Joneses — blow them out of the
water!*

Of course, in many ways this is nothing new — old as time actually. The
*hack* a mere modern vernacular reframing of practices and marketing
techniques dating back to the snake oil salesmen and carnival barkers of
yore, promising everything from miracle cures to deliverance with a
sharp preacher’s tongue and unconscious reflexive response that
suppresses question and finds us impulsively forking over our
hard-earned coin to the prophet of the moment.

But the acute nature of this modern rush is also something qualitatively
new. And disturbing.

It used to be an insult to call someone a hack. Now it’s high praise.
How did a term so historically pejorative suddenly become aspirational?

To figure this out, let’s take a step back.

[KnowYourMeme](http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/life-hacks){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor} defines “life hacks” as “tricks, skills or shortcuts
that are meant to increase a person’s productivity or efficiency in
their everyday lives.”

The term was originally coined by tech journalist Danny O’Brien in 2003,
but it seems the idea really took off with the publication of [Tim
Ferriss’](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/ "TF"){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor} wildly popular [*4-Hour
Workweek*](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0307465357/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0307465357&linkCode=as2&tag=ricroloffweb-20 "4HWW"){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor}* — *a New York Times’ bestselling primer on how to
cut inefficiencies out of your waking hours, streamline your day and
ultimately “hack” your way to professional and personal happiness. Tim
followed up with two companion chart busters — [*4-Hour
Body*](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/030746363X/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=030746363X&linkCode=as2&tag=ricroloffweb-20 "4HB"){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor} ** and [*4-Hour
Chef*](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0547884591/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0547884591&linkCode=as2&tag=ricroloffweb-20 "4HC"){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor}* — *both highly entertaining and instructional
roadmaps on shortcutting proficiency of a panoply of fitness and
lifestyle skills on a fraction of the traditional time and energy
commitment required for mastery. 80% of the results in 20% of the time.

*Yahtzee!* A movement was born. The rest is history.

And I have a big problem with this.

Okay Tim Ferriss fanboys, calm yourselves before you attack me. I
actually love Tim’s books. And have nothing but mad respect for
everything Tim is about — an idea-generating energizer bunny of a
forward-thinking innovator tirelessly upending tradition and plumbing
the deep crevasse for creative, new modalities and approaches to do more
and live better. That is pure awesome. I too count myself as a fan. As I
explain at length in [*Finding
Ultra*](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0307952207/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0307952207&linkCode=as2&tag=ricroloffweb-20 "Finding Ultra"){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor}, I experimented with and relied upon many of the
tools shared in 4HWW to reconfigure my life so that I could properly
prepare for my performances at [The Ultraman World
Championships](http://www.ultramanlive.com/ "UM"){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor}. They work. And my life is better as a result of
reading that book. I am also forever grateful to Tim for allowing me to
[guest blog on his
site](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2012/05/23/10-uncommon-superfoods-from-the-world-of-ultra-endurance/ "Tim Ferriss Blog"){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor} on the day my book was released. He didn’t have to do
that. But he did, and I will never forget the favor. But I digress…

In truth, a properly implemented *hack* is nothing more than leveraging
a good idea (I guess \#idea or \#goodidea don’t really trend well when
it comes to the meme-o-sphere). A way to cut wasted time so that you can
invest yourself more fully in what makes your heart truly beat — a
passion and pursuit that can transform your life by catalyzing a new
journey.

I take no issue with this. It’s great, actually. And I think this is
what Tim was actually *trying* to say.

But somewhere along the line I think even Tim would agree that we lost
the thread. Somewhere along the line the *hack* has become the
destination, rather than the tool. An end in and of itself. Kind of like
becoming obsessed with a table saw rather than the process of using it
to learn how to make a beautiful piece of furniture.

Moreover, the explosion of *hack culture* seems to inherently disrespect
the paramount value of the journey — the true value in any
experience — by supplanting it with an expedited rush to access to a
result. And result is empty without grappling with the resistance that
inevitably defines the battle.

Let’s assume for a moment that there really is a way to circumvent the
time-tested notions of hard work, patience, dedication and passion to
achieve prosperity, success, health and true satisfaction in life.
Spoiler alert: there isn’t. But okay, let’s assume…

Would I take that path? Should you?

With resounding conviction, I say no.

*How dare you — that’s just plain anti-American!*

Is it? The entire ideal of the American Dream (which is problematic in
its own right and basically an illusion, but that’s the subject of
another blog post) was founded upon the aforementioned principles.
*Anything is possible if you work hard.* It’s inherent in the very value
system of manifest destiny. It’s what makes America, well, America.

Yet to contravene and devalue the meme of the moment by suggesting the
admittedly unsexy notion that hard work, patience & the paramount value
of experience over short cuts and quick fixes — in many ways the
**“anti-hack” — **isn’t just iconoclastic, it’s anathema. Our principles
have become inverted. A myopia eroding the core value system and the
essence of what gives our lives meaning.

If you want to achieve the minimum aptitude threshold in a discipline so
that you can tell others you did something, hack away. Implement the
short cut, rush to accomplish the task and check the box. Bucket list
item \#54 done. Moving on to the next hack.

Now ask yourself: *how did that experience make me feel?*

If you’re like me, probably not much of anything.

Now let’s examine what happens when you try to be the very best you can
be at something you are inherently passionate about. Suddenly the heart
beats faster. The palms begin to sweat. Maybe it’s excitement. But more
likely it’s fear. That’s right, fear. Commitment — total dedication to
the core — is about as scary as it gets. It’s not just hard. It’s
without a doubt the most difficult thing imaginable. Because if you take
that risk, truly put yourself completely on the line and fail (or
succeed — yes fear of success plagues more than you might imagine), then
you will have to reckon with yourself. *Terrifying!*

But that is the whole point and purpose. Failure (or success) — or at
least the prospect of failure (or success) — is what gives the journey
proper context, rich consistency, and towering emotional, physical,
financial and spiritual stakes that fertilize the soul for quantum
growth irrespective of outcome. And growth is everything. But it can
only result from earnest investment in experience. So fear and
commitment aren’t things to be avoided, but rather embraced with a bear
hug of everything.

This is to say that the inherent value of any given experience is
directly proportional to the extent to which you are physically,
mentally, emotionally and spiritually invested in it. Using a hack to
short cut the journey only robs you of the rich texture presented by the
opportunity. In a word, it’s the difference between winning the lottery
and earning that ransom by weathering the blood, sweat and tears that
come with total fidelity.

So it’s the experience you should be seeking, not the short cut. It’s
the voyage you should embrace, not the destination. It’s the path that
elevates the soul, not the destination. It’s the process that ennobles,
not the result.

If you’re with me so far, then congratulations. I submit that you are on
the right track.

A track that has no tolerance for hacks.

On a personal level, I could have competed at the [Ultraman World
Championships](http://www.ultramanlive.com/ "UM"){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor} on 20% of the training I put in and still finished
the race. But I didn’t. Instead, I put everything I had into those races
because I had a yearning to answer a question for myself — *what am I
truly capable of?* That query and yearning that could only be answered
to my satisfaction by eliminating shortcuts and investing completely.

I could have banged out my book in 20% of the time it took to write it
and likely it would have still found it’s way onto the Kindle. *But I
couldn’t say that I did everything possible to tell the story I wanted
to tell to the best of my abilities.*

I could be out having dinner with friends right now rather than pulling
my hair out trying to figure out how to make sense of these ideas
swimming around in my head. After all, I’m not getting paid for this. I
had dental surgery today and should be in bed right now. Nobody asked me
to write these ideas down. Quite possibly (likely?) you might all
dislike the offering altogether. And ultimately writing is hard. Really
hard. Much harder than riding my bike. I already tweeted the notion, so
it would be easy to rationalize watching *House of Cards* instead. *But
I would be repressing who I am. Denying my passion to express myself.
Saying no to experience.*

And that is simply unacceptable.

Today I enjoy tremendous satisfaction knowing that on a daily basis I
strive to invest absolutely everything I have in what makes my [heart
beat
hardest](http://www.richroll.com/uncategorized/the-art-of-living-with-purpose/ "Art of Living On Purpose by Rich Roll"){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor}. Looking back, it seems to all make perfect sense how
events unfolded to take me from where I was to where I am today. But in
the midst of it all, it was generally a chaotic, terrifying madness
often teetering on disaster and punctuated by countless lows and
gut-wrenching come-to-Jesus moments — I risked everything to the journey
on a level beyond any relationship to rationality or acceptable norms of
sanity.

And yet I rarely think about destinations. What it was like when I
crossed a finish line. What I was feeling the day my book finally hit
shelves. What I was doing the day I finally was able to hang up the suit
and stop practicing law for a living. Or where I was when my little
podcast project surpassed a million downloads. But not a day goes by
that I don’t feel tremendous gratitude for the process endured to arrive
at those seminal moments in my life. The unbearable pain of that 40-mile
training run. The countless all nighters spent writing my book at the
24-hour Kinko’s sitting next to the homeless guy using a desk as a bed
(I had no office at the time and for whatever reason I can’t seem to
write well at home, but again I digress). It’s the vividness of those
memories that give me a profound sense of fulfillment and gratitude. A
sense of trudging a path of deep personal meaning. Simply put, you just
can’t put a dollar value on that. As trite as it may sound, it truly is
priceless.

Don’t misunderstand. I like goals and I like achieving them. They keep
me focused and act as powerful drivers that lend structure to my day.
But it’s crucial to emotionally detach from the end result or
third-party reception to your efforts. Let it go. It’s none of your
business. It’s also irrelevant. But what is relevant is signing up for
the journey. What is crucial is showing up at the starting line. What is
essential is taking that first step, followed by a second, on what I can
only hope will be a pilgrimage that will last the remainder of your days
in this short life. Irrespective of success or failure (subjective terms
anyway), you are guaranteed to experience what it is like to be fully
invested in something, anything. This is what it is to be completely
alive. And that is the gift.

Just the other day I published [my podcast interview with filmmaker
Casey
Neistat](http://www.richroll.com/podcast/rrp-73-casey-neistat-on-making-it-count-and-how-to-do-more/ "Casey Neistat Rich Roll Podcast"){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor}. I am a big fan of Casey’s work — in my opinion one
of the most interesting, unique and culturally relevant populist
filmmakers working today. But I’m an even bigger fan of his ethos and
perspective. A life premised on embracing adventure, for Casey it’s all
about the journey. Not to the manor born, Casey raised himself out of
his trailer home welfare plight to where he is today by tackling
incomprehensible odds head-on; by relentlessly investing in himself and
doubling down on his passion; by embracing the hard road; by
circumventing the gatekeepers and refusing to wait for permission; and
by making countless bold, fearless choices.

Near the end of our conversation, Casey said something really compelling
that catalyzed my desire to write this post. His roadmap for those who
ask how he has built the creative, fulfilling life he currently enjoys.
**A recipe for success he guarantees to work**:

***All you have to do is commit your entire life to something, which
will result in one of two outcomes. Either you will succeed, or you will
die trying, which is in and of itself it’s own form of success.***

*This people, is the very essence of the anti-hack.*

No shortcuts. Just a good, solid Malcolm Gladwell-esque 10,000+ hours of
downright busting your ass on something that means everything to you.
Toiling in obscurity. Failing relentlessly. Picking yourself up off the
floor when all is lost and going the extra mile when nobody is looking.
Slow, incremental progress. Tiny hard fought victories along the way
that begin to take form. And ultimately congeal to lay the foundation
for a life and legacy that has true value.

It’s sexy and easy to frame a narrative of the overnight success
story — WhatsApp, Instagram, and American Idol are perfect examples of
how the media can twist reality to multiply page views and amplify
ratings. But take a peek behind the curtain on any so-called
instantaneous triumph and you are certain to find an objective truth
that doesn’t fit the neatly packaged narrative. Because every genuine,
sustainable success is birthed only from incredible persistence,
interminable patience, invisible defeats, rabid dedication and
unrelenting passion.

Hacks are about a short cut to a destination. I don’t give a shit about
destinations. But I care deeply about showing up and suiting up for the
journey. And what I have learned about myself and others by embracing
the pain, toil failure, tears, fear, mistakes that go hand in hand with
the hard road less travelled is what gives everything meaning, context
and value. A deep gratitude for a life lived well — to the fullest, and
without compromise.

There is nothing sexy or meme-worthy about the journey. It’s hard. It’s
painful. It’s not glossy and doesn’t lend itself to a hashtag or a glib
tweet. *It will never trend on Twitter.*

This is not news. Deep down we all know it to be true. It’s why my tweet
struck a chord despite being at odds with the savory meme-o-licious
flavor of the month.

So if you have a passion and aspire to greatness — if you want to see
what you are truly made of, or just how far you can go and what you are
truly capable of — forget the hack. Commit to the daily pressure that
compels infinitesimal progress over time. Wake up before dawn and apply
yourself in silent anonymity. Practice your craft — in whatever shape or
form that may be — late into the evening with relentless rigor. Embrace
the fear. Let go of perfection. Allow yourself to fail. Welcome the
obstacles. Forget the results. Give yourself over to your passion with
every fiber of who you are. And live out the rest of your days trying to
do better.

I can’t promise that you will succeed in the way our culture
inappropriately defines the term. But I can absolutely guarantee that
you will become deeply acquainted with who you truly are. You will touch
and exude passion. And discover what it means to be truly alive.

In my opinion, this is the legit definition of success. And the essence
of greatness.

Because the seat of genuine value, beauty and satisfaction lies in the
experience of getting there. That’s the truth.

A promise no hack can give you. Not now, not ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

***Rich Roll*** *is world renowned ultra-distance triathlete, wellness
advocate, host of the* [*Rich Roll
Podcast*](https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/the-rich-roll-podcast/id582272991?mt=2){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor} *& \#1 bestselling author of* [***Finding Ultra:
Rejecting Middle Age, Becoming One of the World’s Fittest Men &
Discovering
Himself***](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0307952207/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0307952207&linkCode=as2&tag=ricroloffweb-20){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor} ****** *(Crown Archetype)****.***

*You can read his musings and listen to his conversations at*
[*richroll.com*](http://www.richroll.com/){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor}*.*

*Follow him on* [*Twitter*](http://twitter.com/richroll){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor}*,*
[*Facebook*](https://www.facebook.com/richrollfans){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor} *&*
[*Instagram*](http://www.instagram.com/richroll){.markup--anchor
.markup--p-anchor}*.*

*Copyright © 2014 by Rich Roll.*

### [richroll](https://byrslf.co/@richroll "Go to the profile of richroll"){.link .link--primary .u-accentColor--hoverTextNormal} {#richroll .ui-h3 .u-fontSize18 .u-lineHeightTighter .u-marginBottom4}

Plantpowered ultra athlete; wellness advocate; family guy. Named one of
the 25 Fittest Guys in the World by Men's Fitness. Best-selling author
of FINDING ULTRA.

