For Depression and Anxiety, Running Is a Unique Therapy 
=======================================================

Running puts everyone in a better mood. But for some of us, our miles
are key to managing depression and anxiety.

By [Scott Douglas | Runner's World](https://www.runnersworld.com/author/210518/scott-douglas/)

[Aug 9, 2017](https://www.runnersworld.com/health-injuries/a18807336/running-anxiety-depression/)

Most Tuesdays, I run early in the morning with a woman named Meredith.
For such close friends, we’re quite different. Meredith is a voluble
social worker who draws energy from crowds. I’m an introverted editor
who works from home. Meredith runs her best in large races and loves
training with big groups. I’ve set PRs in solo time trials and tend to
bail when a run’s head count gets above five. Meredith is a worrier,
beset by regrets and anticipated outcomes, who has sought treatment for
anxiety. I have dysthymia, or chronic low-grade depression. We like to
joke that Meredith stays up late as a way of avoiding the next day,
whereas I go to bed early to speed the arrival of a better tomorrow.

We do have one key thing in common: Meredith and I run primarily to
bolster our mental health. Like all runners, we relish the short-term
experience of finishing our run feeling like we’ve hit reset and can
better handle the rest of the day. What’s not universal is our
recognition that, without regular running, the underlying fabric of our
lives—our friendships, our marriages, our careers, our odds of being
something other than miserable most of the time—will fray. For those of
us with depression or anxiety, we need running like a diabetic needs
insulin.

Meredith and I discovered this decades ago, and now researchers and
practitioners are starting to catch up. Studies show that [aerobic
exercise can be as effective as
anti-depressants](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1468-2850.2006.00021.x/epdf?referrer_access_token=6OFEoP9QqARIozyOn-mfHIta6bR2k8jH0KrdpFOxC64x6MvrC4nV5clWHS7liPoOukKBUnDSlIVRILRsjoNCxKDw33QBRnFvc54lShOayayl26WdIh-8yeWdYUmJ8_zAAlFCgiweAle8WpTXlINSDEce9SXGaesXln7bBO2p4sNQ9d--3joXD86U8HTgz51kgvwq3hD8bngbIoGdWjNCN9okZ9niVADxLlIitDfWAueUsmCFu7yMoo6Qe_wy-xII_J4UBEN_dKe0XotpvqrWCM2LlrRwd1vauZj26AulzsIg-d34e3wJD0OIakMiay_V){.body-link}
in treating mild to moderate depression (and with side effects like
improved health and weight management rather than bloating and sexual
dysfunction). In countries such as Australia, United Kingdom, and the
Netherlands, official guidelines include exercise as a first-line
treatment for depression. Although U.S. guidelines have yet to change,
at least one psychotherapist, Sepideh Saremi in Los Angeles, California,
conducts [on-the-run
sessions](https://www.runnersworld.com/general-interest/this-therapist-takes-her-sessions-off-the-couch-and-onto-the-roads){.body-link}
with willing patients.

How does moving the body change the mind? A growing body of work—both in
the lab and with patients—shows that there’s more to it than endorphins,
the well-known opioid the body produces during certain activities,
including exercise. The emerging, more sophisticated view of running to
improve mental health also takes into account long-term structural
changes in the brain as well as subjective states like mood and
cognition. Science continues working to explain the theory behind what
we runners already know from practice.

Think Different 
---------------

Unlike many with the condition, I’ve never been majorly incapacitated by
depression. Most people would consider me productive, accomplished,
perhaps even energetic, given that my lifetime running odometer is past
110,000 miles. My dysthymia has two main components: *weltschmerz*, a
German word meaning sadness about how reality doesn’t live up to one’s
hopes, and anhedonia, a diminished ability to experience pleasure. Life
often feels like waiting out a series of not-horrible, not-fun
obligations. Things sometimes seem so pointless that I watch myself not
caring that I don’t care. For example, I once received a group email
that a book I’d coauthored had made *The* *New York Times* best seller
list. That’s a big deal in publishing. As if from outside, I observed
myself writing an exclamation-point-filled reply-all response thanking
and congratulating those of us who worked on the book. As I typed I
thought, “Yeah, fine, whatever. Is this really going to lift life above
2 p.m. on a gray Tuesday in March?”\

That it’s possible to be outwardly active but internally askew can mask
just how common depression and anxiety are. In any one year, about 10
percent of the U.S. population would meet the diagnostic criteria for
depression, and about 20 percent for anxiety. (The two often coexist.)
The incidence of those conditions in the running population is probably
similar; [a 2017 review of research published in the *British Journal of
Sports
Medicine*](http://bjsm.bmj.com/content/early/2017/03/02/bjsports-2016-096455){.body-link}
found no difference in depressive symptoms between what the researchers
called “high-performance athletes” and nonathletes. All levels of
runners are affected, with elites such as Olympian Adam Goucher and
Western States 100-mile champions Rob Krar and Nikki Kimball having
spoken publicly about their depression.

Of course, everybody gets sad and worried at times. What distinguishes
those feelings from clinical depression and anxiety? In the short term,
therapists often look for significant changes in emotions, behavior, and
psychological functioning. They also focus on how symptoms such as
feeling agitated, threatened, and uncomfortable (for anxiety) or
joyless, lethargic, and apathetic (for depression) interfere with
people’s everyday functioning. “I look at how these things affect
activities of daily living, like sleeping, going to work, interpersonal
relationships,” says Franklin Brooks, Ph.D., a clinical social worker in
Portland, Maine. “There’s a profound difference between ‘I’m having a
bad day at work’ and ‘I’m having a bad day at work and I’m not going to
get out of bed tomorrow because of it.’”

That classic depiction of depression sounds like what Amelia Gapin, 34,
a software engineer and marathoner from Jersey City, New Jersey, has
experienced. “I’ve had episodes where, for six weeks, two months, I
couldn’t even get myself out of bed,” she says. “During the weekends it
was wake up and take a couple hours to move myself to the couch.”

Ian Kellogg, 22, a 14:43 PR 5K college runner at Otterbein University in
Westerville, Ohio, says, “When I fall into depression, I more often than
not don’t run. I can’t find the energy or willpower to get out the door,
even though I know my training is suffering and that just half an hour
will make me feel better.”

Pati Haaz, 42, also knows this form of depression but was able to use
running to overcome it. In June 2015, the finance professional from
Kendall Park, New Jersey, had a miscarriage while two months pregnant.
She became severely depressed and started missing work. “I didn’t want
to get out of bed, I didn’t want to go out of my house,” she says. “It
was that feeling that there’s no point in continuing. I had no
motivation to do anything other than take care of my kids, which was
more an automatic duty.” Guilt over being depressed—“feeling like I’m
the worst mother in the world”—compounded the situation.

Haaz started seeing a therapist who asked about Haaz’s pre-depression
hobbies. Haaz said that she was a runner who, before becoming pregnant,
had planned to run her first marathon that fall in New York City. The
therapist encouraged her to resume running. Haaz decided she needed the
goal of finishing a marathon to overcome the inertia that depression had
introduced to her life.

She found that marathon training helped in two key ways. “If I was
running for the sake of running, I would have stopped with my normal
six-mile run,” Haaz says. “But I was doing 16, 18, 20 miles, things I’d
never done before. I was able to carry this sense of accomplishment into
other areas.”

Even her shortest runs helped Haaz think differently. “If I was driving
or working or waking up in the middle of the night and thinking about
the things that were making me sad, it would just make things worse—it
would become like a spiral, and there was no end to it. But when I was
running, I would think about those same things, and somehow I was able
to process them differently. I would start my run with all these
negative thoughts, and after a mile or two, they were gone.” Five months
after her miscarriage, Haaz finished New York City in 6:38.

Reframing ruminations—thinking differently about hashed-over topics—is
one of the main appeals of running for those of us with mental health
issues. Cecilia Bidwell, 42, an attorney from Tampa, Florida, who has
anxiety, puts it this way: “When I’m running, the thoughts come in and
out, and I’m not worried,” she says. “I can think about things
objectively. I realize that things that I’m thinking are a huge deal
aren’t a big deal in the scheme of things.” The effect carries through
Bidwell’s stressful work days. “When I’ve gone for a good run in the
morning, if things are going haywire at 2 p.m. I’m handling them a lot
better. I’m not creating crises and wondering, ‘Why am I here?’”

The more-immediate cognitive focus of a typical run also contributes to
its efficacy. “When we’re overwhelmed with anxiety and depression,
shifting from the big picture—all the frustrations, worst-case scenario
thinking—to the small, in-the-moment task of doing something that
approaches a goal, like running a four-mile loop with two hills, will
kick off a positive feedback loop that continues throughout the run and
takes our thinking and emotions out of the trench of negativity,” says
Laura Fredendall, Psy.D.

These changes in mood and thinking are more accessible for runners. [In
a 2008 study published in the *Archives of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18226663){.body-link},
ultramarathoners, moderate regular exercisers, and non-exercisers walked
or ran for 30 minutes at a self-selected pace that felt somewhat hard.
After the workout, everyone’s mood had improved, but that of the
ultramarathoners and moderate exercisers did so about twice as much as
that of the sedentary people. Also, the ultrarunners and regular
exercisers reported greater vigor and less fatigue after the workout
than before, while the non-exercisers felt the same.

The reason is that runners can hold a good pace for a long time without
going anaerobic, and that allows the physiological processes that lead
to improved mood, according to Panteleimon Ekkekakis, Ph.D., a professor
at Iowa State University who is a leading figure in the field of
exercise psychology. “In sedentary folks, their ventilatory
threshold—the point where exercise is no longer purely aerobic—is very
low,” he says. “So they get up off the couch, they take a few steps,
they’re already above their ventilatory threshold. If you’re a regular
runner, you have the cardiorespiratory fitness to sustain an exercise
intensity that’s associated with a feel-better effect.”

My Chemical Romance {#my-chemical-romance .body-h2}
-------------------

What causes that feel-better effect? Although the quick answer is
usually endorphins, they’re not the only relevant aspect of brain
chemistry. What’s more, focusing on the nebulous “runner’s high” ignores
crucial changes in brain structure and thinking patterns that running
can induce.\

Endorphins entered the runner’s lexicon in the 1970s. That’s when it
became known that these chemicals, which bind to neuron receptors in the
brain, are released at higher levels during a run. Several studies found
that higher blood levels of postrun endorphins correlated to improved
mood. In terms of the brain, however, a strong correlation between
endorphin levels and improved mood [wasn’t demonstrated until
2008](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/5556660_The_Runner%27s_High_Opioidergic_Mechanisms_in_the_Human_Brain){.body-link}.
German researchers used PET scans, an imaging study often used to check
for cancer, on triathletes’ brains while the athletes ran for two hours.
They found high levels of endorphins in the prefrontal cortex and other
parts of the brain associated with mood, and that these levels aligned
with the athletes’ reports of euphoria.

But endorphins aren’t everything. As part of his research into human
evolution, David Raichlen, Ph.D., a professor of anthropology at the
University of Arizona, has measured pre- and postrun endocannabinoid
levels in [runners, dogs, and
ferrets](http://jeb.biologists.org/content/215/8/1331){.body-link}.
Endocannabinoids are substances that bind to the same receptors in the
brain as THC, the primary substance responsible for a marijuana high.

Raichlen says there are two leading theories on why running causes
increased levels of endorphins and endocannabinoids. First, when humans
became hunter/gatherers close to 2 million years ago, they became more
active; the release of these chemicals, which act as pain relievers, may
have evolved to allow longer, faster movement. In this scenario, the
feel-good aspect is a byproduct. Second, higher levels of these
chemicals while active could have motivated continued movement, which
would lead to getting more food and ultimately higher survival rates.
Raichlen says the two mechanisms might have worked in tandem.

Whatever the original mechanism for these evolutionary adaptations,
they’re especially helpful for modern runners with mental-health issues.
It’s nice to run for an hour and go from being in a good-enough mood to
a better one. It’s a fundamental shift to go from being miserable to
content, thanks to an infusion of feel-good substances. “I’ll finish a
run and be like, ‘Wow, this is how most people feel all the time,’”
Bidwell says.

A short-term mood boost thanks to endorphins and endocannibinoids is one
thing. (Granted, one much-appreciated thing.) But where running really
helps with mental health is over time, thanks to a change in brain
structure. [A review of research published in *Clinical Psychology
Review*](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.454.814&rep=rep1&type=pdf){.body-link}
concluded “exercise training recruits a process which confers enduring
resilience to stress.” This appears to occur because regular running
produces the same two changes that are thought to be responsible for the
effectiveness of anti-depressants: increased levels of the
neurotransmitters serotonin and norepinephrine, and neurogenesis, or the
creation of new neurons.

Neurogenesis occurs primarily due to a protein called brain-derived
neurotrophic factor, which has been been called the Miracle-Gro of the
brain. “It helps neurons fire and wire together,” Fredendall says. Much
of this happens in the hippocampus, an area of the brain that’s often
shrunken in people with depression. “MRI scans have shown that even
after a six-month exercise intervention, there’s a visible increase in
the size of the hippocampus,” Ekkekakis says.

As Ekkekakis notes, you have to be fit to really get the daily benefits
that can lead to structural changes. Of course, you also have to get
yourself out the door, which can be especially difficult if you’re
depressed. But success in running on an especially tough day makes it
easier to get out the next time. And it can spur another key mental
health benefit of running.

I Think I Can, I Think I Can 
----------------------------

Levels of chemicals in the brain are only part of your mental state.
There’s also cognition, or mental processes. Cognition includes not just
straightforward thinking (“I should run long today because a blizzard is
coming tomorrow”) but also more involved phenomena, such as how you
think about your thoughts.\

A hallmark of depression is self-defeating, absolutist
thinking—“everything is harder than it should be,” “there’s no pleasure
in my life,” “it’s always going to be like this.” I’ve learned that
lacing up and hitting the roads is my best way to break free from such
thoughts. On a daily basis, running reminds me that I can overcome
apathy and torpor. Seeing that small victory, I can convince myself that
progress is possible on meeting professional goals, or not feeling
lonely so often, or figuring out how to afford retirement. “The
subjective experience of seeing yourself do something can make you feel
better,” Fredendall says.

Ekkekakis says cognition is key to understanding another aspect of
running’s effectiveness. “If you take anti-depressants and they make you
feel better, the psychological attribution is external—the patients
believe that the reason they get better is because of the drug they
take,” he says. “With exercise, the attribution is internal—the reason I
get better is that I’m doing this thing, I’m putting in the effort.
That’s where perhaps the additional benefit of exercise compared to
anti-depressants lies—that sense of empowerment, that sense that I’m
taking control of my situation.”

You Don’t Hear About the Golfer’s High 
--------------------------------------

Is there something uniquely effective about running for managing mental
health? Or can any form of exercise provide similar relief?\

The short answer is nobody knows for sure, and definitive research
comparing the mood-boosting properties of various ways of working out is
unlikely. “Such a study would have multiple arms—optimal intensity,
duration, or frequency of different forms of exercise—so you go from a
study costing \$1 million to \$3 million,” Ekkekakis says. “The
pharmaceutical companies fund their own studies, but who is going to
fund the exercise studies? The amount of government funding available is
simply not at that level.” ([According to the World Health
Organization](http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2017/world-health-day/en/){.body-link},
depression is the leading cause of disability and poor health worldwide,
but on average only 3 percent of government health budgets is spent on
mental-health issues.)

It is safe to say that purposeful exercise is better than incidental
physical activity. [A study published in *Medicine & Science in Sports &
Exercise*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27824691){.body-link}
found improved mood in people after they worked out, but not after
daily-living activities such as climbing stairs. Aerobic exercise seems
more effective than something like lifting weights. In fact, [a review
of research published in *Preventive
Medicine*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/m/pubmed/27765659/?i=2&from=exercise%20fitness){.body-link}
found that people with low levels of cardiovascular fitness were at
greater risk of developing depression.

When I asked Raichlen about running compared to other activities, he
began by citing more studies on endocannabinoids and talking about
“mechanical pain” and “analgesic triggers.” Then the practical runner in
him took over.

“It’s much easier to get yourself into a reasonable intensity compared
to a lot of other sports,” he says. “It’s not too difficult to get in
the right zone and stay there. You have a lot more control over your
speed than even in something like cycling, where your effort level is
more dictated by the topography or even stop lights.”

“I’ve dabbled with triathlons a little,” says Rich Harfst, 54, a federal
government employee and marathoner from Annandale, Virginia, who was
diagnosed with depression as a teenager. “I’ve done yoga, I’ve done
cycling. Nothing is the same as running.” Ultrarunner Krar, who also
mountain bikes and competes in ski mountaineering, says, “Running is
that perfect balance where you can push yourself as hard as you like and
more easily get in that flow state.” Bidwell says that when she doesn’t
run, her anxiety puts her basic state at a 4 out of 10. “Running
normally gets me to an 8,” she says. “When I’m hurt and swim instead,
I’m at 6.”

That’s been my experience over the last nearly four decades. When I’ve
been injured and switch to cycling or pool running, the workouts
themselves are like proverbial castor oil—I do them because I know I
need them, not because they’re enjoyable in themselves. The net that
keeps me from plummeting starts to fray and sag.

But when running is going well, the net is taut and strong. A few times
a month, usually while cruising along a wooded trail speckled with
morning light, I’m overcome with a sensation best articulated as simply
“yes.” Yes to the moment, yes to whatever is in store the rest of the
day, yes to life itself. If I could bottle that feeling, I’d eventually
forget what it’s like to be depressed.

Most Tuesdays, I run early in the morning with a woman named Meredith.
For such close friends, we’re quite different. Meredith is a voluble
social worker who draws energy from crowds. I’m an introverted editor
who works from home. Meredith runs her best in large races and loves
training with big groups. I’ve set PRs in solo time trials and tend to
bail when a run’s head count gets above five. Meredith is a worrier,
beset by regrets and anticipated outcomes, who has sought treatment for
anxiety. I have dysthymia, or chronic low-grade depression. We like to
joke that Meredith stays up late as a way of avoiding the next day,
whereas I go to bed early to speed the arrival of a better tomorrow.

We do have one key thing in common: Meredith and I run primarily to
bolster our mental health. Like all runners, we relish the short-term
experience of finishing our run feeling like we’ve hit reset and can
better handle the rest of the day. What’s not universal is our
recognition that, without regular running, the underlying fabric of our
lives—our friendships, our marriages, our careers, our odds of being
something other than miserable most of the time—will fray. For those of
us with depression or anxiety, we need running like a diabetic needs
insulin.

Meredith and I discovered this decades ago, and now researchers and
practitioners are starting to catch up. Studies show that [aerobic
exercise can be as effective as
anti-depressants](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1468-2850.2006.00021.x/epdf?referrer_access_token=6OFEoP9QqARIozyOn-mfHIta6bR2k8jH0KrdpFOxC64x6MvrC4nV5clWHS7liPoOukKBUnDSlIVRILRsjoNCxKDw33QBRnFvc54lShOayayl26WdIh-8yeWdYUmJ8_zAAlFCgiweAle8WpTXlINSDEce9SXGaesXln7bBO2p4sNQ9d--3joXD86U8HTgz51kgvwq3hD8bngbIoGdWjNCN9okZ9niVADxLlIitDfWAueUsmCFu7yMoo6Qe_wy-xII_J4UBEN_dKe0XotpvqrWCM2LlrRwd1vauZj26AulzsIg-d34e3wJD0OIakMiay_V){.body-link}
in treating mild to moderate depression (and with side effects like
improved health and weight management rather than bloating and sexual
dysfunction). In countries such as Australia, United Kingdom, and the
Netherlands, official guidelines include exercise as a first-line
treatment for depression. Although U.S. guidelines have yet to change,
at least one psychotherapist, Sepideh Saremi in Los Angeles, California,
conducts [on-the-run
sessions](https://www.runnersworld.com/general-interest/this-therapist-takes-her-sessions-off-the-couch-and-onto-the-roads){.body-link}
with willing patients.

How does moving the body change the mind? A growing body of work—both in
the lab and with patients—shows that there’s more to it than endorphins,
the well-known opioid the body produces during certain activities,
including exercise. The emerging, more sophisticated view of running to
improve mental health also takes into account long-term structural
changes in the brain as well as subjective states like mood and
cognition. Science continues working to explain the theory behind what
we runners already know from practice.

Think Different 
---------------

Unlike many with the condition, I’ve never been majorly incapacitated by
depression. Most people would consider me productive, accomplished,
perhaps even energetic, given that my lifetime running odometer is past
110,000 miles. My dysthymia has two main components: *weltschmerz*, a
German word meaning sadness about how reality doesn’t live up to one’s
hopes, and anhedonia, a diminished ability to experience pleasure. Life
often feels like waiting out a series of not-horrible, not-fun
obligations. Things sometimes seem so pointless that I watch myself not
caring that I don’t care. For example, I once received a group email
that a book I’d coauthored had made *The* *New York Times* best seller
list. That’s a big deal in publishing. As if from outside, I observed
myself writing an exclamation-point-filled reply-all response thanking
and congratulating those of us who worked on the book. As I typed I
thought, “Yeah, fine, whatever. Is this really going to lift life above
2 p.m. on a gray Tuesday in March?”\

That it’s possible to be outwardly active but internally askew can mask
just how common depression and anxiety are. In any one year, about 10
percent of the U.S. population would meet the diagnostic criteria for
depression, and about 20 percent for anxiety. (The two often coexist.)
The incidence of those conditions in the running population is probably
similar; [a 2017 review of research published in the *British Journal of
Sports
Medicine*](http://bjsm.bmj.com/content/early/2017/03/02/bjsports-2016-096455){.body-link}
found no difference in depressive symptoms between what the researchers
called “high-performance athletes” and nonathletes. All levels of
runners are affected, with elites such as Olympian Adam Goucher and
Western States 100-mile champions Rob Krar and Nikki Kimball having
spoken publicly about their depression.

Of course, everybody gets sad and worried at times. What distinguishes
those feelings from clinical depression and anxiety? In the short term,
therapists often look for significant changes in emotions, behavior, and
psychological functioning. They also focus on how symptoms such as
feeling agitated, threatened, and uncomfortable (for anxiety) or
joyless, lethargic, and apathetic (for depression) interfere with
people’s everyday functioning. “I look at how these things affect
activities of daily living, like sleeping, going to work, interpersonal
relationships,” says Franklin Brooks, Ph.D., a clinical social worker in
Portland, Maine. “There’s a profound difference between ‘I’m having a
bad day at work’ and ‘I’m having a bad day at work and I’m not going to
get out of bed tomorrow because of it.’”

That classic depiction of depression sounds like what Amelia Gapin, 34,
a software engineer and marathoner from Jersey City, New Jersey, has
experienced. “I’ve had episodes where, for six weeks, two months, I
couldn’t even get myself out of bed,” she says. “During the weekends it
was wake up and take a couple hours to move myself to the couch.”

Ian Kellogg, 22, a 14:43 PR 5K college runner at Otterbein University in
Westerville, Ohio, says, “When I fall into depression, I more often than
not don’t run. I can’t find the energy or willpower to get out the door,
even though I know my training is suffering and that just half an hour
will make me feel better.”

Pati Haaz, 42, also knows this form of depression but was able to use
running to overcome it. In June 2015, the finance professional from
Kendall Park, New Jersey, had a miscarriage while two months pregnant.
She became severely depressed and started missing work. “I didn’t want
to get out of bed, I didn’t want to go out of my house,” she says. “It
was that feeling that there’s no point in continuing. I had no
motivation to do anything other than take care of my kids, which was
more an automatic duty.” Guilt over being depressed—“feeling like I’m
the worst mother in the world”—compounded the situation.

Haaz started seeing a therapist who asked about Haaz’s pre-depression
hobbies. Haaz said that she was a runner who, before becoming pregnant,
had planned to run her first marathon that fall in New York City. The
therapist encouraged her to resume running. Haaz decided she needed the
goal of finishing a marathon to overcome the inertia that depression had
introduced to her life.

She found that marathon training helped in two key ways. “If I was
running for the sake of running, I would have stopped with my normal
six-mile run,” Haaz says. “But I was doing 16, 18, 20 miles, things I’d
never done before. I was able to carry this sense of accomplishment into
other areas.”

Even her shortest runs helped Haaz think differently. “If I was driving
or working or waking up in the middle of the night and thinking about
the things that were making me sad, it would just make things worse—it
would become like a spiral, and there was no end to it. But when I was
running, I would think about those same things, and somehow I was able
to process them differently. I would start my run with all these
negative thoughts, and after a mile or two, they were gone.” Five months
after her miscarriage, Haaz finished New York City in 6:38.

Reframing ruminations—thinking differently about hashed-over topics—is
one of the main appeals of running for those of us with mental health
issues. Cecilia Bidwell, 42, an attorney from Tampa, Florida, who has
anxiety, puts it this way: “When I’m running, the thoughts come in and
out, and I’m not worried,” she says. “I can think about things
objectively. I realize that things that I’m thinking are a huge deal
aren’t a big deal in the scheme of things.” The effect carries through
Bidwell’s stressful work days. “When I’ve gone for a good run in the
morning, if things are going haywire at 2 p.m. I’m handling them a lot
better. I’m not creating crises and wondering, ‘Why am I here?’”

The more-immediate cognitive focus of a typical run also contributes to
its efficacy. “When we’re overwhelmed with anxiety and depression,
shifting from the big picture—all the frustrations, worst-case scenario
thinking—to the small, in-the-moment task of doing something that
approaches a goal, like running a four-mile loop with two hills, will
kick off a positive feedback loop that continues throughout the run and
takes our thinking and emotions out of the trench of negativity,” says
Laura Fredendall, Psy.D.

These changes in mood and thinking are more accessible for runners. [In
a 2008 study published in the *Archives of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18226663){.body-link},
ultramarathoners, moderate regular exercisers, and non-exercisers walked
or ran for 30 minutes at a self-selected pace that felt somewhat hard.
After the workout, everyone’s mood had improved, but that of the
ultramarathoners and moderate exercisers did so about twice as much as
that of the sedentary people. Also, the ultrarunners and regular
exercisers reported greater vigor and less fatigue after the workout
than before, while the non-exercisers felt the same.

The reason is that runners can hold a good pace for a long time without
going anaerobic, and that allows the physiological processes that lead
to improved mood, according to Panteleimon Ekkekakis, Ph.D., a professor
at Iowa State University who is a leading figure in the field of
exercise psychology. “In sedentary folks, their ventilatory
threshold—the point where exercise is no longer purely aerobic—is very
low,” he says. “So they get up off the couch, they take a few steps,
they’re already above their ventilatory threshold. If you’re a regular
runner, you have the cardiorespiratory fitness to sustain an exercise
intensity that’s associated with a feel-better effect.”

My Chemical Romance {#my-chemical-romance-1 .body-h2}
-------------------

What causes that feel-better effect? Although the quick answer is
usually endorphins, they’re not the only relevant aspect of brain
chemistry. What’s more, focusing on the nebulous “runner’s high” ignores
crucial changes in brain structure and thinking patterns that running
can induce.\

Endorphins entered the runner’s lexicon in the 1970s. That’s when it
became known that these chemicals, which bind to neuron receptors in the
brain, are released at higher levels during a run. Several studies found
that higher blood levels of postrun endorphins correlated to improved
mood. In terms of the brain, however, a strong correlation between
endorphin levels and improved mood [wasn’t demonstrated until
2008](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/5556660_The_Runner%27s_High_Opioidergic_Mechanisms_in_the_Human_Brain){.body-link}.
German researchers used PET scans, an imaging study often used to check
for cancer, on triathletes’ brains while the athletes ran for two hours.
They found high levels of endorphins in the prefrontal cortex and other
parts of the brain associated with mood, and that these levels aligned
with the athletes’ reports of euphoria.

But endorphins aren’t everything. As part of his research into human
evolution, David Raichlen, Ph.D., a professor of anthropology at the
University of Arizona, has measured pre- and postrun endocannabinoid
levels in [runners, dogs, and
ferrets](http://jeb.biologists.org/content/215/8/1331){.body-link}.
Endocannabinoids are substances that bind to the same receptors in the
brain as THC, the primary substance responsible for a marijuana high.

Raichlen says there are two leading theories on why running causes
increased levels of endorphins and endocannabinoids. First, when humans
became hunter/gatherers close to 2 million years ago, they became more
active; the release of these chemicals, which act as pain relievers, may
have evolved to allow longer, faster movement. In this scenario, the
feel-good aspect is a byproduct. Second, higher levels of these
chemicals while active could have motivated continued movement, which
would lead to getting more food and ultimately higher survival rates.
Raichlen says the two mechanisms might have worked in tandem.

Whatever the original mechanism for these evolutionary adaptations,
they’re especially helpful for modern runners with mental-health issues.
It’s nice to run for an hour and go from being in a good-enough mood to
a better one. It’s a fundamental shift to go from being miserable to
content, thanks to an infusion of feel-good substances. “I’ll finish a
run and be like, ‘Wow, this is how most people feel all the time,’”
Bidwell says.

A short-term mood boost thanks to endorphins and endocannibinoids is one
thing. (Granted, one much-appreciated thing.) But where running really
helps with mental health is over time, thanks to a change in brain
structure. [A review of research published in *Clinical Psychology
Review*](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.454.814&rep=rep1&type=pdf){.body-link}
concluded “exercise training recruits a process which confers enduring
resilience to stress.” This appears to occur because regular running
produces the same two changes that are thought to be responsible for the
effectiveness of anti-depressants: increased levels of the
neurotransmitters serotonin and norepinephrine, and neurogenesis, or the
creation of new neurons.

Neurogenesis occurs primarily due to a protein called brain-derived
neurotrophic factor, which has been been called the Miracle-Gro of the
brain. “It helps neurons fire and wire together,” Fredendall says. Much
of this happens in the hippocampus, an area of the brain that’s often
shrunken in people with depression. “MRI scans have shown that even
after a six-month exercise intervention, there’s a visible increase in
the size of the hippocampus,” Ekkekakis says.

As Ekkekakis notes, you have to be fit to really get the daily benefits
that can lead to structural changes. Of course, you also have to get
yourself out the door, which can be especially difficult if you’re
depressed. But success in running on an especially tough day makes it
easier to get out the next time. And it can spur another key mental
health benefit of running.

I Think I Can, I Think I Can 
----------------------------

Levels of chemicals in the brain are only part of your mental state.
There’s also cognition, or mental processes. Cognition includes not just
straightforward thinking (“I should run long today because a blizzard is
coming tomorrow”) but also more involved phenomena, such as how you
think about your thoughts.\

A hallmark of depression is self-defeating, absolutist
thinking—“everything is harder than it should be,” “there’s no pleasure
in my life,” “it’s always going to be like this.” I’ve learned that
lacing up and hitting the roads is my best way to break free from such
thoughts. On a daily basis, running reminds me that I can overcome
apathy and torpor. Seeing that small victory, I can convince myself that
progress is possible on meeting professional goals, or not feeling
lonely so often, or figuring out how to afford retirement. “The
subjective experience of seeing yourself do something can make you feel
better,” Fredendall says.

Ekkekakis says cognition is key to understanding another aspect of
running’s effectiveness. “If you take anti-depressants and they make you
feel better, the psychological attribution is external—the patients
believe that the reason they get better is because of the drug they
take,” he says. “With exercise, the attribution is internal—the reason I
get better is that I’m doing this thing, I’m putting in the effort.
That’s where perhaps the additional benefit of exercise compared to
anti-depressants lies—that sense of empowerment, that sense that I’m
taking control of my situation.”

You Don’t Hear About the Golfer’s High 
--------------------------------------

Is there something uniquely effective about running for managing mental
health? Or can any form of exercise provide similar relief?\

The short answer is nobody knows for sure, and definitive research
comparing the mood-boosting properties of various ways of working out is
unlikely. “Such a study would have multiple arms—optimal intensity,
duration, or frequency of different forms of exercise—so you go from a
study costing \$1 million to \$3 million,” Ekkekakis says. “The
pharmaceutical companies fund their own studies, but who is going to
fund the exercise studies? The amount of government funding available is
simply not at that level.” ([According to the World Health
Organization](http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2017/world-health-day/en/){.body-link},
depression is the leading cause of disability and poor health worldwide,
but on average only 3 percent of government health budgets is spent on
mental-health issues.)

It is safe to say that purposeful exercise is better than incidental
physical activity. [A study published in *Medicine & Science in Sports &
Exercise*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27824691){.body-link}
found improved mood in people after they worked out, but not after
daily-living activities such as climbing stairs. Aerobic exercise seems
more effective than something like lifting weights. In fact, [a review
of research published in *Preventive
Medicine*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/m/pubmed/27765659/?i=2&from=exercise%20fitness){.body-link}
found that people with low levels of cardiovascular fitness were at
greater risk of developing depression.

When I asked Raichlen about running compared to other activities, he
began by citing more studies on endocannabinoids and talking about
“mechanical pain” and “analgesic triggers.” Then the practical runner in
him took over.

“It’s much easier to get yourself into a reasonable intensity compared
to a lot of other sports,” he says. “It’s not too difficult to get in
the right zone and stay there. You have a lot more control over your
speed than even in something like cycling, where your effort level is
more dictated by the topography or even stop lights.”

“I’ve dabbled with triathlons a little,” says Rich Harfst, 54, a federal
government employee and marathoner from Annandale, Virginia, who was
diagnosed with depression as a teenager. “I’ve done yoga, I’ve done
cycling. Nothing is the same as running.” Ultrarunner Krar, who also
mountain bikes and competes in ski mountaineering, says, “Running is
that perfect balance where you can push yourself as hard as you like and
more easily get in that flow state.” Bidwell says that when she doesn’t
run, her anxiety puts her basic state at a 4 out of 10. “Running
normally gets me to an 8,” she says. “When I’m hurt and swim instead,
I’m at 6.”

That’s been my experience over the last nearly four decades. When I’ve
been injured and switch to cycling or pool running, the workouts
themselves are like proverbial castor oil—I do them because I know I
need them, not because they’re enjoyable in themselves. The net that
keeps me from plummeting starts to fray and sag.

But when running is going well, the net is taut and strong. A few times
a month, usually while cruising along a wooded trail speckled with
morning light, I’m overcome with a sensation best articulated as simply
“yes.” Yes to the moment, yes to whatever is in store the rest of the
day, yes to life itself. If I could bottle that feeling, I’d eventually
forget what it’s like to be depressed.

—

Contributing editor Scott Douglas’s book *Running Is My Therapy*, which
will be published in April, is [available for
pre-order](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1615194444/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=runnersworld06-20&linkCode=xm2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1615194444&ascsubtag=%5BASIN%7C1615194444%5Bnid%7C2199386%5Bvid%7C2289226%5Bbrand%7CRW%5Butm%7C){.body-link}.

[A Part of Hearst Digital Media]{.footer-network-tagline} [ Runner's
World participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means
we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased
through our links to retailer sites. ]{.footer-affiliate-disclosure}

©2018 Hearst Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
