### [SKATEBOARDING NOW HAS ITS OWN ACADEMIC CONFERENCE](http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/2018/05/30/now-skateboarding-academic-conference/)

[May 30, 2018](http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/2018/05/30/now-skateboarding-academic-conference/)
[Nic Dobija-Nootens](http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/author/nicdobija/)

Growing up I’d heard the stereotype that skateboarders were bad at
school, but I personally never saw it play out. A lot of the
skateboarders I met in high school were kinda nerdy. One of them even
scored a perfect 2400 on his SAT without studying, I’d heard. So it
comes as both a surprise and expectation that skateboarders will finally
get their own international academic conference, called appropriately,
[Pushing Boarders](https://www.pushingboarders.com/), taking place June
1-3 in London.

Pushing Boarders will consist of seven talks given by small groups of
panelists on topics including race, female representation, and urban
architecture, all as they pertain to skateboarding. The conference is
the joint effort of Theo Krish and Philip Joa from
[SkatePal](http://www.skatepal.co.uk/), Stuart Maclure from [Long Live
Southbank](http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/2018/03/21/check-pillars-society-edit-supporting-southbank/),
and Thom Callan-Riley, Sander Hölsgens, and Dani Abulhawa from [Re-verb
Skateboarding](https://www.reverbskateboarding.com/).

If you think skateboarding would be better off not dressing up in tweed
and getting overanalyzed, you’re too late. People have been writing
scholarly
[books](https://www.amazon.com/Skateboarding-Space-City-Architecture-Body/dp/1859734936),
[papers](http://urbanpolicy.net/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/Howell_2001_Poetics-of-Security_NoPix.pdf),
and
[articles](http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/2012/11/26/how-corporations-are-changing-skateboarding-and-why-it-matters/)
on the topic for the past 20 years, there just hasn’t been a
centralizing community to organize all that thoughtful work. It’s not
unheard of for professors to include skateboarding articles on [college
syllabi](https://www.scribd.com/doc/310231279/examinationofglobalsubculturessyllabus-1)
too.

The organizers told me one of their primary reasons for creating the
conference is to show younger skateboarders that it’s possible to pursue
skateboarding academically. “Skaters who want to stay close to
skateboarding when they go to university might study graphic design or
filmmaking, things with an obvious connection to jobs in the \[skate\]
industry,” they wrote me. “But we want to make this connection through
the humanities and social sciences. If you want to do something with
film, anthropology, charities, urban space, South Korea, social
policies, pedagogy…why not use skateboarding as the prism to understand
these fields?”

![](http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/05.-Pushing_Boarders_Poster_Landscape.jpg){.aligncenter
.size-full .wp-image-70648 sizes="(max-width: 2160px) 100vw, 2160px"
srcset="http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/05.-Pushing_Boarders_Poster_Landscape.jpg 2160w, http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/05.-Pushing_Boarders_Poster_Landscape-172x86.jpg 172w, http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/05.-Pushing_Boarders_Poster_Landscape-768x384.jpg 768w, http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/05.-Pushing_Boarders_Poster_Landscape-1024x512.jpg 1024w"}

[The panelists](https://www.pushingboarders.com/speakers/) generally
have distinct backgrounds and areas of expertise from one another — one
panelist for instance, Dr. Åsa Bäckström, teaches at a health science
school in Sweden and has been researching skateboarders for two decades,
while another panelist, Karl Watson, is known for doing [spine-twisting
grinds](https://youtu.be/89BLK9nBiCs?t=1m3s) and writing a children’s
book — representing the inclusivity and eccentricity that skateboarding
fosters.

Panelists also include a number of Jenkem writers and contributors —
[Anthony
Pappalardo](http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/author/anthony-pappalardo/),
[Kyle Beachy](http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/author/kyle-beachy/), and
[Ted Barrow](http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/search/ted+barrow) — as well
as folks we’ve interviewed before, like [Alexis
Sablone](http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/2017/08/29/hanging-alexis-sablone/)
and [Neftalie Williams the Skateboarding
Ambassador](http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/2017/03/01/americas-ambassador-of-skateboarding-neftalie-williams/).

So if you happen to be in London goofing off for Summer break or know
someone who is, head over to the conference to get your serious skate
nerd on. Attendance at any of the talks is free but you have to
[register online
beforehand](https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/pushing-boarders-talks-exhibitions-skateboarding-tickets-44880742509).

And if you can’t make it, don’t worry. All the talks will be recorded
and uploaded online afterward. “So many academic conferences cost
hundreds to attend and then the findings/discussions are put in journals
behind paywalls. This means hardly anyone outside certain circles get to
read them. We’re all about making it available to everyone,” the
organizers told me.

Our editor CK, who recently [hacked Street League for
beers](https://www.instagram.com/p/BjUrEQmlWgd/?taken-by=jenkemmag),
will be there so if you see him feel free to hit him with an old
fashioned spitball or complain to him in person about his [Office
Picks](http://www.jenkemmag.com/home/tag/office-picks/). Cheers, mate!

*Words: Nic Dobija-Nootens\
Share this with a fuckin’ nerd on
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/jenkemmag).\
Report this as 2 manny werds on
[Instagram](http://www.instagram.com/jenkemmag) and
[Twitter](http://www.twitter.com/jenkemmag).*

