How Quickly Do You Lose Fitness When You Stop Running?

New research provides guidance on how much down time is too much. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------

[[By ]{.byline-role}[[Scott
Douglas](/person/scott-douglas)]{.field-author} ]{.byline-wrapper}
[[Friday, January 12, 2018, 4:51 am]{property="dc:date dc:created"
content="2018-01-11T11:00:00-05:00" datatype="xsd:dateTime"}]{.date}

Work and life overload. Injury or illness. Seemingly endless winter
weather. Physical and mental fatigue after reaching a big goal. There
are all sorts of reasons for runners to go cold turkey. In those
situations, it’s natural to wonder: For how long can I not run without
*real* harm to my current fitness level?

A partial answer is that your [heart](http://www.runnersworld.com/heart)
starts to show significant signs of detraining after just a few weeks of
little to no exercise. That’s the key takeaway from [a new study on
marathoners](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29212672) published in
the *Journal of Applied Physiology*.

Researchers (somehow) found 21 people who, after completing the 2016
[Boston Marathon](http://www.runnersworld.com/boston-marathon) as
charity runners, were willing to almost entirely stop exercising for
eight weeks. The study subjects agreed to
[exercise](http://www.runnersworld.com/exercise) less than two hours per
week during that time, with no workout to last more than an hour. During
[marathon training](http://www.runnersworld.com/marathon-training) they
had averaged almost 32 miles per week, while after the marathon they
averaged three to four miles per week. The researchers tested key
aspects of their cardiovascular fitness two weeks before the marathon
(i.e., at peak training), and repeated the tests four and eight weeks
after the marathon.

After four weeks of relative inactivity, the runners had significant
drops in blood volume and plasma volume, and the left ventricle of their
hearts decreased in mass and thickness. Blood volume decreased by 3.6
percent. These changes can be thought of as the body’s blood-pumping
system deteriorating, both in terms of the size and power of the pump
(the left ventricle changes) and the resources available to pump (blood
and plasma volume). One result would be a given pace feeling harder,
because less oxygen would reach working muscles per heart beat than had
been the case at the time of their marathon.

During the second four weeks of inactivity, the detraining changes
regarding blood volume and the left ventricle stabilized. There were
detraining effects in the right ventricle during this time, but,
according to lead researcher Charles Pedlar, Ph.D., those changes are
mostly of interest to sport cardiologists.

Interestingly, neither the runners’ [VO2
max](http://www.runnersworld.com/vo2-max) (a measure of maximal aerobic
capacity) or total hemoglobin mass (a measure of red blood cells, which
carry oxygen to working muscles) declined significantly during the
study. (The study notes that red blood cells have an average lifespan of
110 days, or roughly twice as long as this study.) Nonetheless, the
runners’ performance on a treadmill test suffered. The test entailed the
treadmill moving at five miles per hour and the gradient increasing 0.5
percent every 15 seconds until the runners quit. The average time to
exhaustion decreased by five to six seconds per week in the eight weeks
after the marathon. This test matches most runners’ anecdotal
observations that, after a period of no running, their ability to
sustain a hard pace has declined more than their ability to maintain
their easy pace.

The runners’ detraining wasn’t as severe as that observed in studies
involving total inactivity (such as in people confined to bed for weeks
at a time). “I think had we completely stopped them from exercising we
would have seen a greater, more consistent detraining effect,” Pedlar,
of Harvard Medical School in Boston and St. Mary’s University in the
United Kingdom, wrote in an email. “Maintaining a small amount of
training can offset the losses.” (Allowing some activity probably also
helped in finding willing subjects, he acknowledged, and it better
captured real-world practices.) Pedlar said that the lack of decline in
VO2 max and hemoglobin mass “suggests that with the resumption of
training we could see a fairly rapid return to form. Plasma volume can
rapidly expand since it is composed mostly of water.”

It’s important to note that this study looked only at some key
cardiovascular components of fitness. It didn’t measure many other
things that have a significant effect on how fast you are at any given
moment, such as capillary density, muscular endurance, or neuromuscular
coordination (how well your muscles communicate with your nervous
system). Also, there’s great variability among runners in how soon they
feel “off” after not running. [Roger
Bannister](http://www.runnersworld.com/roger-bannister) didn’t run for
the five days before he became the first person to break 4:00 in the
mile. Others feel like they’ve forgotten how to run after a few days
off. Because of all these factors, as well as others such as genetics
and lifestyle, there’s no one-size-fits-all predictor of lost fitness.
[Estimates of decreases in endurance
performance](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/236590070_Detraining)
range from 4 to 25 percent after three to four weeks of no exercise.

Pedlar suggests remaining minimally active, for both fitness and
[health](https://www.runnersworld.com/health) reasons, even during a
purposeful [recovery](http://www.runnersworld.com/recovery) phase. [We
reported last
month](https://www.runnersworld.com/psychology/why-you-should-run-stressful-times)
how even small bits of exercise should help you navigate high-stress
periods better than bagging your workouts altogether, despite how crazy
things may seem. In [a recent review of
research](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28625704) on how people’s
moods changed after voluntarily giving up exercise, the subjects’
anxiety and depressive symptoms began to worsen significantly after two
weeks. Our bodies and minds seem to be in sync on this issue—having more
than a few weeks of inactivity means forfeiting some of the key benefits
of running.

©2018 Hearst Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

