10 Hilarious Trail-Running Bloggers You Should Be Following 
===========================================================

[ Yitka Winn ] May 26th, 2015

They say that laughter is the best medicine—get a healthy dose of it with these charmingly witty runners
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/shoeless-joe-sage.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-5965 width="419" height="269"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/shoeless-joe-sage.inart.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/shoeless-joe-sage.inart-300x193.jpg 300w"}\
[“Shoeless” Joe Creighton conducts irreverent interviews with top trail
runners for the Seattle Running Club. Photo courtesy of Joe
Creighton]{.credit}

“There is the stereotype that if y­ou’re a runner, you’re the type of
person who celebrates ALL forms of healthy living. I am not that type of
person,” writes Seattle-based trail runner and comic artist Matt
Inman—better known as The Oatmeal—in a web comic titled *The Terrible
and Wonderful Reasons Why I Run Long Distances.* “They say you should
treat your body like a temple. I treat mine like a fast-moving
dumpster.”

Unlike Inman, some of us have a habit of taking our training—or
ourselves—very, very seriously. This can turn a sport we initially
sought out—presumably for some type of enjoyment—into a grind.

Need a reminder of the sillier aspects of trail running? Or maybe just a
humorous little pick-me-up? Here are 10 runners with blogs or
social-media channels worth following.

 

**1.** [**Sabrina Little, Not Allergic to
Adventure**](http://notallergictoadventure.blogspot.com/)

Some people are fast. Some people are funny. Twenty-four-hour and 200K
American record holder Sabrina Little (formerly Sabrina Moran) of Waco,
Texas, is both; after podium-finishing most every race she enters, she
frequently posts comical race reports [on her
blog.](http://notallergictoadventure.blogspot.com)

In a recap of the Grasslands 50-miler, she recalls getting lost the
first year she ran it (before going on to finish ahead of not only all
the women, but also all the men): “At one point, I stood alone in a
field of cows, crying, ‘Is anybody out there?’ The answer was no. I
found my way back onto the course, where more cows were standing in
front of the cow gate I needed to enter. I had to sweet talk them into
letting me through: ‘I love cows. I’m lactose-intolerant. Let me in.’”

An About Me page offers several deeper insights into who Sabrina
is—including the best thing she’s discovered to do in the weight room
(“Single-Leg Squats”) and the second best thing she’s discovered to do
in the weight room (“Make friends with elliptical neighbors. They are a
captive audience.”)

If her blog isn’t enough, you can [find her on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/beaninsneakers), too, with gems like this
one: “Completed a hard 16-mile tempo workout this morning, then DNFed an
ice cream cone this afternoon. The struggle is real.”

 

**2.** [**Shoeless Joe Creighton, Seattle Running
Club**](http://seattlerunningclub.org/wordpress/blog/author/joe/)

You have to dig a ways into the Seattle Running Club’s blog archives to
uncover the nuggets that comprise [“Shoeless Joe” Creighton’s interview
series](http://seattlerunningclub.org/wordpress/blog/author/joe/)—but
his wildly irreverent Q&As are worth the read. Primarily focused on
Pacific Northwest trail runners like Jodee Adams-Moore and Uli Steidl,
Shoeless Joe peppers his interviews with ridiculous questions (“Was your
high school cross country team a meat market like mine?”, “Are there any
ultrarunners in Colorado?” or the recurring “*Dirty Dancing* or *Pretty
Woman*?”) and photos of his interview subjects being put off by his
obnoxious commentary and Vibram-clad feet.

All eight of the interviews are fantastic, but if you need one to start
with, Shoeless Joe’s 2012 [phone interview with Sage
Canaday](http://seattlerunningclub.org/wordpress/blog/2012/11/shoeless-joe-interview-3-sage-canaday/)
comes highly recommended.

Or, dig in with this video of a “speed round” of questions with Justin
Houck. Don’t miss the video credits and disclaimer at the end:

 

 

 

**3.** [**Liza Howard**](http://www.lizahoward.com/)

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/liz-howard-squidportrait2.resized.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-5966 width="212" height="300"}\
[Photo courtesy of Liza Howard]{.credit}

If you’ve ever felt irritated by the gratuitously scenic mountain photos
or boastful social-media posts of trail runners who appear to have no
jobs or families or obligations of any kind, you will appreciate the
candor of national trail-running champion and running coach [Liza
Howard’s deadpan-funny blog](http://www.lizahoward.com) that she began
in 2010.

Her posts include frequently hilarious recaps of races, everyday
training runs in Texas (infused with honesty: “To all you people posting
about how good you felt on your runs today … I felt like crap”), or
adventures in motherhood.

From [her Marathon des Sables stage-race
report](http://www.lizahoward.com/2015/04/marathon-des-sables-2015-report/):
“There was a pale flabby fellow who walked by my tent every day wearing
small maroon underwear, white slippers, and two square pieces of shiny
tape over his nipples. That’s it. I came to look forward to seeing him
go by. I can’t say why exactly. It was reassuring somehow. ‘See,
everything’s fine. Maroon-underwear guy is still here worried about
nipple rash. We’re all going to get through this.’”

Other recommended posts: [Social Norming for
Ultrarunners](http://www.lizahoward.com/2015/04/social-orming-ultrarunners/)
and [Playgrounds and Non-Linear
Success](http://www.lizahoward.com/2015/04/playgrounds-non-linear-success/).

**4.** [**David Roche, Beauty and
Change**](http://beautyandchange.blogspot.com/)

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/david-roche-funny-runner.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-5967 width="419" height="260"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/david-roche-funny-runner.inart.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/david-roche-funny-runner.inart-300x186.jpg 300w"}\
[David Roche brings a sense of humor to his competitive mountain-running
exploits. Photo courtesy of David Roche]{.credit}

In our December 2014 issue, [we
profiled](https://trailrunnermag.com/people/q-and-a/1615-a-match-made-in-mountain-running)
trail-running power couple Megan (formerly Deakins) and David Roche. The
super-fast pair described their first date—after cancelling on each
other “five times or so”—as a long evening at a frozen-yogurt place.
Since then, they’ve gotten married, spent their honeymoon in Italy
racing at the World Mountain Running Championships, smashed multiple
course records all over the country, devoted an Instagram account to
their dog ([@addiedoesstuff](https://instagram.com/addiedoesstuff/)) and
picked up a few lucrative sponsorships including Nike and, appropriately
enough, frozen-yogurt company Arctic Zero.

David, who runs a coaching service called Some Work, All Play, [keeps up
an active blog](http://beautyandchange.blogspot.com/) about the couple’s
running exploits. In one post, he recounts a 5K he and Megan ran
together on New Year’s Eve just a few months into their
relationship—before either of them were serious runners. They donned
evening wear, had a few drinks, and come the race start at midnight,
David recalls, “I leaned over for the obligatory New Year’s kiss. I put
my hand on the back of her sparkling dress, and my lips slowly began the
descent to her face. She didn’t even move her head. She just grunted
disapproval and took off like a bat out of hell as the start gun fired.”

Both Roches also tweet, often about running-related experiences out on
the trails or at home. A recent post from
[Megan](https://twitter.com/MegRoche33): “Me, ‘Why are there running
clothes in the sink?’ \[[David](https://twitter.com/MountainRoche)\],
‘I’m washing them.’ Me, ‘We have a washer!’ David, ‘Most people do
this.’”

 

**5.** [**Ethan Newberry, The Ginger Runner**](http://gingerrunner.com/)

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/ginger-runner-funny.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-5968 width="419" height="419"
sizes="(max-width: 419px) 85vw, 419px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/ginger-runner-funny.inart.jpg 419w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/ginger-runner-funny.inart-150x150.jpg 150w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/ginger-runner-funny.inart-300x300.jpg 300w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/ginger-runner-funny.inart-261x261.jpg 261w"}\
[Courtesy of Ethan “The Ginger Runner” Newberry]{.credit}

An actor and improv comedian out of Los Angeles, Ethan Newberry produces
light-hearted YouTube videos that do everything from review
trail-running gear to preview race courses to interview prominent
figures in the trail-running community. On the welcome video on [his
YouTube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCSxqXJj9btSS3nrmBg8GXdQ),
Ethan says, “Let me start off by saying, I am not a professional
athlete. I’m not a professional runner. Nor are you. Unless you are—in
which case, yay! This site is by runners, for runners—but with a twist.
We’re f\*\*\*ing fun!”

Another motto he swears by: “Train Hard. Race Harder. Party Hardest.”

Recent interviews on the show include elite running coach Jason Koop and
top athletes like Anton Krupicka, Kaci Lickteig and Jamil Coury.

 

**6.** [**Jenn Shelton’s Twitter
Account**](https://twitter.com/sheltonjenn)

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/jenn-shelton-funny-blog.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-5969 width="352" height="419"
sizes="(max-width: 352px) 85vw, 352px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/jenn-shelton-funny-blog.inart.jpg 352w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/jenn-shelton-funny-blog.inart-252x300.jpg 252w"}\
[Photo courtesy of Jenn Shelton]{.credit}

In addition to frequently contributing to *Trail Runner*’s [Last Gasp
column](https://trailrunnermag.com/people/last-gasp), Jenn
Shelton—ultrarunner, 100-mile champion and trail-running
ambassador—maintains an active following on her Twitter page
[@SheltonJenn](https://twitter.com/sheltonjenn). Almost always
punctuated with witty makeshift hasthtags, her tweets range from random
musings (“Another day with this cough and Ima have abs like a Ken doll
\#freetraining”), to retweets of adventures shared with Lance Armstrong,
to photos of herself vomiting on a track (“\#trackpictuesday”), to quips
not even close to appropriate for quoting in this article.

A series of tweets from February: “Anyone with AAA. Meet me downtown and
I’ll buy you dinner. \#lockedmykeysinside \#again. The po won’t help
unless there’s a child locked in there too. I told them my skis are my
children but they weren’t amused.”

 

**7.** [**Brendan Trimboli, Solar Weasel**](http://solarweasel.com/)

![alt](https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/trimbouli.inart.jpg?x39187){.size-full
.wp-image-5970 width="342" height="419"
sizes="(max-width: 342px) 85vw, 342px"
srcset="https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/trimbouli.inart.jpg 342w, https://trailrunnermag.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/trimbouli.inart-245x300.jpg 245w"}\
[That’s one fast weasel. Photo courtesy of Brendan Trimboli]{.credit}

“In exactly one week I will board an airplane (for my fellow Durango
Luddites: a steel tube with wings) which will whisk me away to a very
unfamiliar world where mustachioed people in lederhosen and tilted caps
drive tiny cars on the wrong side of the road,” wrote Colorado trail
runner [Brendan Trimboli on his blog](http://solarweasel.com) before the
2013 Ultra-Trail du Mont-Blanc. His Euro-American comparisons continued
once he landed in Europe: “You know how beards are a really big deal
back in the States? (I’m looking at you, Rob Krar.) Well, wear one here
and you might as well paint, *‘Hey everyone! I’m a freaking American!!’*
across your back in red, white and blue. It’s times like these when
perhaps my inability to grow facial hair isn’t such a bad thing.”

In addition to amusing race reports, Brendan also shares stunning photos
and occasionally heartfelt posts like [this tribute to his roommate and
fellow Durango runner, Paul
Hamilton](http://solarweasel.com/2014-san-juan-solstice-50/): “At San
Juan Solstice he charged off the line in a striped, cotton tank top that
he may have scavenged from a thrift shop floor for all I know, his hat
reversed and blond locks flapping in the breeze. He gets after it
without overthinking it, a ‘simpler-is-better’ approach that I (and
perhaps many of us) could benefit from.”

 

[**8. Matt The Angry Jogger**](http://angryjogger.com/)

An Irishman now residing in Tottenham, England, Matt the Angry Jogger
introduces himself on his blog as someone who “used to be fat and
miserable and now I’m just miserable (sometimes).” In addition to
documenting his 70-pound weight-loss journey—often with searing honesty
about ongoing frustrations and setbacks—Matt also frequently blogs about
the sillier aspects of running culture.

Begun in late 2011, his running blog is a deep well of angsty but funny,
self-deprecating, swear-word-laden content—including posts such as [24
Awkward Moments That We All Share As
Runners,](http://angryjogger.com/22-awkward-moments-that-we-all-share-as-runners.html)
[How Tripping On Magic Mushrooms Is Actually Quite Similar Emotionally
To Running A
Marathon](http://angryjogger.com/how-tripping-on-magic-mushrooms-is-actually-quite-similar-to-running-a-marathon.html)
and [My Alli Diet Pill Horror Story—When My Bowels Failed Me After 4
Pints of
Guinness](http://angryjogger.com/my-alli-diet-pill-horror-story-when-my-bowels-failed-me-after-4-pints-of-guinness.html).

 

**9.** [**Stephanie Case, Ultra Runner
Girl**](http://ultrarunnergirl.com/)

Stephanie Case is an ultrarunner, freelance writer, human-rights lawyer
and founder of the nonprofit Free to Run, which provides opportunities
for women and girls to get involved in sports in conflict-afflicted
communities like Afghanistan and South Sudan. She’s also very funny.

[Though her line of work is a serious one, her
blog—]{style="font-size: 12.1599998474121px; line-height: 1.3em;"}[Ultra
Runner Girl: Running (tripping and falling) my way through
life!](http://ultrarunnergirl.com)[—is just as entertaining as it is
inspirational, educational and thought-provoking. While living in South
Sudan, she wrote, “Most of the time when I go out on my runs, I get a
positive reaction. The kids practically trip over themselves to come
join me when they see me coming down the path, often fighting and
pushing each other just to grab my hand (I haven’t figured out how to
calm them down!). I really have never seen such \[a\] level of
exuberance before—consistently and repeatedly—from kids of any country.
I think you’d have to tell a child from North America that they had just
inherited 500 puppies, 1000 PlayStations and Spiderman as a permanent
playmate in order to elicit the same reaction. It is truly infectious
(the only infection I’m not trying to avoid
here).”]{style="font-size: 12.1599998474121px; line-height: 1.3em;"}

A few particularly humorous posts of note: [Top Five Most Awkward
Massages](http://ultrarunnergirl.com/2015/04/17/awkwardmassages/), [When
It Rains, It Poo-rs: Training with
Dysentery,](http://ultrarunnergirl.com/2012/08/23/when-it-rains-it-poo-rs-training-with-dysentery/)
and [20 Similarities Between Aid Workers and Long-Distance
Runners](http://ultrarunnergirl.com/2014/05/15/20-similarities-between-aid-workers-and-long-distance-runners/),
which includes observations like, “We both have strong quad muscles.
Ultrarunners and aid workers have to spend a lot of time squatting in
latrines or out in the bush. If you don’t start off with good quads,
you’ll develop them quickly.”

 
**10.** [**Matthew Inman, The Oatmeal**](http://theoatmeal.com)

Seattle web-designer-turned-cartoonist Matthew Inman launched his
website, The Oatmeal, in 2009 to publish comics and quizzes related to
everything from cats to dogs to zombies to English grammar. In 2011, he
ran his first 50-mile trail race. Two years later, he coined the term
“the Blerch,” began directing races and released a full-length comic
book, *[The Terrible and Wonderful Reasons Why I Run Long
Distances](http://theoatmeal.com/comics/running)*.

[Though Inman’s website is not exclusively devoted to running, it’s a
topic that crops up regularly in his comics. Other suggested reading:
]{style="font-size: 12.1599998474121px; line-height: 1.3em;"}[Trail
Runners vs. Mountain
Goats](http://theoatmeal.com/comics/runners_vs_goats)[,
]{style="font-size: 12.1599998474121px; line-height: 1.3em;"}[I Ran My
First 50 Mile Ultra Marathon Last
Week](http://theoatmeal.com/blog/ultramarathon)[ and
]{style="font-size: 12.1599998474121px; line-height: 1.3em;"}[The Dos
and Do Nots of Running Your First
Marathon](http://theoatmeal.com/comics/marathon_do)[, which defines a
marathon as such: “A popular form of overpriced torture wherein
participants wake up at ass-o-clock in the morning and stand in the
freezing cold until it’s time to run, at which point they miserably trot
for a god-awful interval of time that could be better spent sleeping in
and/or consuming large quantities of beer and
cupcakes.”]{style="font-size: 12.1599998474121px; line-height: 1.3em;"}

 

**Bonus:** This [“What is Ultra” Tumblr
blog](http://whatisultra.tumblr.com) appears to have gone defunct last
August, but it’s still a treasure trove of hysterical trail- and
ultrarunning memes. Thanks, in particular, for [this shoutout to *Trail
Runner*](http://whatisultra.tumblr.com/post/63650077234/when-i-come-home-to-find-ultrarunning-trail).

 

Who’d we miss? Let us know in the comments who your favorite running
bloggers are!

