## 2019-01-11

I am not a runner. I am reading Rich Roll's recovery from alcohol and all the dark and low spots are quite descriptive of the life I live. It is not that there aren't any happy times and people, but I let them down in a daily basis and they somehow allow me to misstep because they love me, as if I were a bit of a child or an idiot who they can oversee on the faults. Of course I have my own view and think I am right about so many things, but when things go wrong, when co-workers can't take it anymore, that is a stop sign, telling me that I am not leading at all a functional life. I'm a blood-sucker, tacking out and in my favour, in advantage, the life of those who are tolerant enough to still have me around.

Let's move to some non important facts. I think I can run and enjoy, but it has become a chore I only enjoy because of the aftermath, but only to a certain extent because it is isolated moving the body, not a complete experience. Why would I run nowadays anyway? Unclear. But the need is out there, and for any reason the stoppage is there as well. Since the beginning of year I can count very few moments of running at all, I have even thought of hacking miles into the distance counter by adding up miles done trekking through the mountains. I even had a rush of adrenalin and rock climbed with a above expected performance: I tried to pay attention to technique, relied mostly on my feet, had some hanging training behind my back for the last two months, and could manage well the communication and trust rapport from who was helping me out.

And yes, I didn't do awful, I can still hack these things a bit, but that is only useful for fouling myself: I don't have an excessive body mass, and I have ran quite a bit in the past, so this puts me ahead of the average man, and once in a while I am bold enough to run a longer race than my training would suggest, and finish (even if amongst the last). But that is not what makes someone a runner. What does?

