Wishlist 2018-12-06
===================

Quick overview for 1st week in Chaltén: 

+ Phillip to approve date activity to reserve the following dates December 30, 31; January 1st, January 3.
+ Phillip to aprove paid excursions on date January 2nd and 4th (and 5th). Once confirmed Benji to check how to make down payment, and send precise info to Phil.

### Chaltén and around

+ **December 30**. [La Wafflería](https://www.rivendelchalten.com/la-waffleria/) [Romina]. ALL
OK, willing to open the place for filming and interviewing and going
outside. Confirm Date. You up Phil?
+ **December 31**. [Estancia La Quinta](https://estancialaquinta.com.ar/) [Alfredo]. \[Chaltén\] All OK with Alfredo. His spouse (Patricia), other person from town says, is historian. Confirm date! Yes?
+ **January 1st**. _Ocupa_ [Alejandro Luiz] is a person that occupied a terrain, illegally as far as I know. I have to confirm if he is OK  for interview. I already got his contact and  will try to call by phone. Yes?
+ **January 2nd**. Monte Fitz Roy [Alejandro Monteagudo]. [Serac Expediciones](https://www.interpatagonia.com/elchalten/contemplacion-cerro-fitz-roy.html). CHECK Technical requirements for trekking to [Fitz Roy](http://www.serac.com.ar/espanol/trekking/tk2_trekking_el_chalten_patagonia_argentina.php).\
Here the important point is that you choose which option you see best. Following goes some important notes about access to different daily trips. Mainly that we
will have to plan how to carry the equipment because we will not be able
to reach all destinations by car, we would need 4x4 truck or alike which
can be provided by guides. In case that we go only by our car, then the
distances to reach each place extend further than what would be
reasonable to walk, some 24 kms (nearly 15 miles) total in some cases.
Some options surrounding Mont Fitz Roy:

1.  **To Monte Fitz Roy, through Laguna de Los Tres**
    17 kms by road. Then walk 12 kms towards destination (then come back
    12 kms again). This path has a strong inclination so is expected to
    be hard. Also we can go back through another trail to capture
    different views.
2.  **Laguna Torre**
    Also 12 kms to walk, and back. Less vertical demanding than
    previous.
3.  **Intermediate options**
    Only 4/6 kms for both previous destinations.
4.  **Out of town options: Reservas Los Huemules + Lago del Desierto**
    At 20K and 37K from town: very interesting and picturesque places to
    film. Nota bene: The roads here are made of gravel.
5.  **Price: 210 dollars a day for a group of our 4 persons.**
6.  **My Comment**
    Perhaps best options because practical/viable are the Intermediate
    and One of the Out of town, perhaps on the same day.

+ **January 3**. Camping site / Housing situation (precarity?) [Sofía,] one of the guides, is the contact for this. I sent a Spanish Consent through her to the manager of the place to see if he is OK with the profile of the project. Responses here are delayed because she goes very much to the mountains for several days at a time. 
+ **January 4**. Glaciar Vespigniani + Viedma [Thelma]. She would need our information, and at which hotel we will be at. Confirm payment. Offer by the company as follows.

-   We can stay more time at the reservation. For instance, depart at
    morning in the boat that goes to the two Glaciars \[Vespigniani +
    Viedma\], arriving at 1020 am to the reservation and then that the
    boat picks us up at 0130 pm, which would give us nearly 3 hours in
    the place. This would have a net cost of 2250 Argentinean pesos per
    person.
-   As for transport, we can go by private transport up to Lago del
    Desierto, or in a regular service (verbatim ¿?). The costs are 850
    Argentinean pesos: going out at 8 am and coming back at 7/8 pm. Once
    back from the reservation we could still use nearly an hour at Lago
    del Desierto, so we can go up to Glaciar Huemul and stay there.
-   Private transport is 1680 Argentinean pesos, going out at 8 am, and
    coming back when ready.

+ **January 5th**. [Sofi] to hike to a place to be defined. We have had intermittent communication but has been of much help with data, for example the camping site. Expecting to define soon the destination and reserve a place. 
+ **January 6**. Plans for Calafate. Visiting Estancia Don Accord (less touristic) [Rolo] friend of my contact Gustavo Giorgis, very helpful. 
