[Alan Latham: The French intellectuals are wrong: running is good for the mind]
===============================================================================

#### [Friday 7 November 2008](https://www.independent.co.uk/voices/commentators/alan-latham-the-french-intellectuals-are-wrong-running-is-good-for-the-mind-997957.html)

In June 2007, soon after the election of the French president Nicolas
Sarkozy, a debate broke out in the French media about their new
president's jogging habit. "Western civilisation," the philosopher Alain
Finkielkraut claimed on national television, "in its best sense, was
born with the promenade. Walking is a sensitive, spiritual act," while
"jogging is management of the body. The jogger says I am in control. It
has nothing to do with meditation."

In a similar vein the daily newspaper Lib√©ration wondered, "Le jogging
est-il de droite?" (Is jogging right wing?). There is a prejudice
towards sustained physical recreation activity that is deep-seated in
the European intellectual tradition.

If you consider the European argument a little more closely it's quite
disturbing. It suggests that at some quite low threshold of physical
activity the mind loses its capacity for thought. It also suggests that
people who engage in physical activity are celebrating a form of brute
thoughtlessness.

So is running stupid? Writers in the 1960s explored the kind of mental
states that running seemed to engender. And running, far from being
exhausting and all-absorbing developed a reputation for creating a
meditative effect.

In the mid-1970s, researchers in California began exploring non-Western
approaches to knowledge, and described a relationship between sport and
the further reaches of the mind and spirit. Mike Spino, a sports analyst
and track coach, described it as "beyond jogging to the inner spaces in
running".

What Spino tried to do was explore the way the body's movement can be
used to both make one a better runner and discover oneself. He was not
alone. Dr George Sheehan, perhaps the most famous of the jogging gurus
and author of Running and Being, wrote, with no sense of irony: "When I
run the road, I am a saint. The distance runner is a prophet."

Beyond the hucksterism, Sheehan was a cardiologist for whom running was
a way of gaining perspective. And his idea, that exercise can improve
mental aptitude, has been born out by subsequent scientific research.

*Dr Alan Latham was speaking at the Lunchtime Lecture series at
University College London*

------------------------------------------------------------------------
