> A useful analogy comes from an unlikely source: chess.  In 1997, when
Garry Kasparov famously lost against IBM's Big Blue, many predicted the
demise of chess grandmasters.   Today, more than 20 years later, as
chess engines have become even stronger and more sophisticated in their
understanding, there is no human player who can beat the best chess
engines, even World Chess Champion Magnus Carlsen.  And yet, there are
more and better chess grandmasters than ever, empowered by being able to
train with these machines.   Computers, partnering with humans, have
taken chess to a completely different level.   Nowadays, a chess player
that didn't take advantage of this technology would simply not be able
to compete.


Sep 9, 2020 /White papers
:::

The long and winding road
=========================

**Reimagining the chronic disease patient journey ** {#reimagining-the-chronic-disease-patient-journey style="text-align: justify; margin: 0in;"}
====================================================

###  {#section style="text-align: justify;"}

::: {style="text-align: left;"}
** **
:::

::: {style="text-align: left;"}
[In spite of its specific characteristics, chronic disease has typically
been managed based on traditional medical frameworks that were designed
to deal with acute conditions.  But times are changing.  AI, algorithms
and digital therapeutics are generating new paradigms for the physician,
enabling them to amplify their focus and to help their patients lead
healthier, fuller lives.]{style="color: inherit;"}
:::

\

::: {.WordSection1 style="page: WordSection1;"}
Do you remember the last time you went to the doctor?  It probably went
a bit like this: after initial pleasantries, you described the symptoms
that you'd been experiencing.  The doctor probably carried out some kind
of check-up in the consulting room.  They may have sent you for more
specialist studies.  With results in hand, they no doubt then prescribed
you a course of action: antibiotics, physiotherapy, wait and see.  And
rounded it off with, "Come back and see me again in two weeks / a month
/ two months".  If the problem didn't clear up - and you didn't get too
busy at work - you probably did go back, maybe to go through a very
similar process, another check-up, and another course of action
prescribed.

 

The drugs may have got more sophisticated, but the patient journey
itself is more or less the same as your parents or even grandparents
would have experienced.  For a long time, this has been the only
available option, and it works well for acute conditions.   However,
these sporadic interventions are generally not well aligned with the
realities of chronic diseases that represent not a one-time malfunction,
but rather a permanent or semi-permanent imbalance that requires a
complex shift in lifestyle rather than a single correction. 

 

Consider all the possible fault points of this approach for the chronic
disease sufferer.  While they may have been experiencing their symptoms
for days, weeks, months or even years, the only firm data point on which
to base the diagnosis is the one measured at a single point of time in
the consulting room or diagnostic center -- the briefest of "photos"
when perhaps the condition can only be understood through a detailed
"movie" of its development over time.   Moreover, that photo has been
taken in a completely artificial environment, under artificial
conditions that don't replicate the patient's day to day life. 
Doctor-patient communication consists primarily of a brief appointment,
that tends to be centered purely on data-gathering, with no time left
for discussing options or offering support.  Once the patient has been
prescribed a course of treatment, there's no guarantee of adherence,
other than goodwill on both sides.  Detection of a worsening of symptoms
is dependent on the patient making the decision, and having the time, to
return for another visit.  If and when they return, the only firm data
point on which to assess progress is another "photo" in the consulting
room.  Given the scarcity of data, it can be easy for important symptoms
to be missed until the patient finds themselves in the emergency room. 
The traditional patient journey could perhaps be summed up as: Plan,
hope, appointment, plan, hope... and so it goes on.  While for a
generally healthy person confronting a flu, this is a suboptimal but
acceptable solution, for a chronic disease sufferer it can mean the
difference between the ability to lead a full and healthy life, and a
vicious circle of emergency visits and recovery.  

 

Now imagine how it could be: the doctor of a chronic disease sufferer
receives, on a regular basis, personal health data that has been
collected automatically, through the use of wearable devices and
applications.  They receive it pre-analyzed, with significant values
highlighted, and suggested courses of action.  They are in regular
contact with the patient, sending motivational messages when they're
sticking to their treatment as agreed, gently nudging when they're not,
and getting in touch early when something unexpected happens that needs
to be corrected.    Multiple data points allow the doctor to make a
holistic assessment of the patient's condition.   Appointments are used
to provide support, and if necessary, to discuss alternative treatment
options.  Treatment is decided between the doctor and the patient, who
will generally feel pretty committed since they were involved in the
discussion and understand the implications.  As they embark on the
treatment program, the doctor receives regular updates on their
progress, and motivates and nudges as required.  A virtuous circle
develops.  Just imagine the likely difference in terms of accuracy of
diagnosis, adherence, clinical outcomes -- and so quality of life.

 

This is a huge shift: from intermittent interventions to continuous
care; from a centralized system based around the health care
practitioner to a multipoint system with many touch points; from a
health system that can be compared to tossing a chronic disease sufferer
into a swimming pool and only intervening to throw them a life-ring when
necessary, to one that sets out clear swim lanes to help them reach the
other side.  But it is no idle dream.  The so-called third wave of
digital health is bringing digital therapeutics: disease-specific
applications that use technology like AI, machine learning and
biosensors to provide continuous data monitoring and sophisticated
analysis.   Digital health ecosystems are developing to connect
different healthcare players and services, enabling them to communicate,
integrate and analyze complicated data flows, and to produce end-to-end
patient care programs. 

 

A digital ecosystem built around a specific chronic disease provides a
patient journey that looks nothing like the sick-care model referred to
at the start of this article.  Instead, it might start with a doctor and
patient designing a care plan together.  The patient would carry out the
plan supported by applications and devices, and constant feedback from
the doctor and other care providers.  The continual collection and
analysis of data from multiple sources would enable the care team to
quickly establish the necessity to intervene, should it arise. 
Appointments between patient and doctor would focus on a discussion of
results and progress, backed up by data and AI-generated insights.

 

This has been slowly becoming a reality for some decades now. 
Smartbands and smartwatches have allowed patients to track their
exercise and movement for the last few years.   Home-kits for measuring
blood pressure have been in the market for a long time.   So have
thermometers, applications to track diets, glucose meters, home-care
services, Holter monitors and several other devices.   And doctors and
patients have enjoyed the improved care they bring.

 

37% of US adults tracked one or more health metric digitally in 2018. 
The uptake is still uneven, but the trends are markedly accelerating. 
In Latin America, where digital services have generally taken longer to
gain ground, a vastly lower percentage are tracking their health -- in
2018, just 8% of people in Mexico, 6% in Argentina, and 5% in Colombia. 
Yet data suggest that this could change given the right circumstances. 
Fully 79% of people in Colombia, and 77% in Argentina, would use a
connected health device if it was recommended by their physician. 
Patients are beginning to change their mindset from paying attention to
their health only when something goes wrong, to using technology to
proactively monitor and understand their situation.   The future will
see us relying more and more on expert systems to navigate our health: a
kind of turn-by-turn navigation, for life.  

 

But, contrary to what the flood of consumer health apps of recent years
may suggest, this new patient journey cannot work without the doctor. In
fact, it has the doctor-patient relationship at its heart.  For a start,
it requires patients to proactively take decisions that are beneficial
for their health.  This means major behavioral change, difficult at the
best of times.  Time after time, a strong connection has been proven
between the doctor-patient relationship and treatment adherence, and
here, through motivation and clever nudging, the doctor can help the
patient make healthy decisions.  Furthermore, while the abundance of
data from different healthcare tools and applications may offer some
information to patients, this is nothing compared to the insights that
can be gleaned by a trained professional.  And as the statistics from
Colombia and Argentina around potential use of a connected health device
show, the esteem in which the doctor is held in many cultures means that
their buy-in is essential for uptake.

 

The new patient journey requires an important paradigm shift from the
physician.  In a world obsessed with big data, medicine still seems to
revolve around "small data" -- the one-off diagnostic carried out in the
consulting room.  Technology has sometimes been seen as more of a threat
than an enabler to the medical profession.   And the healthcare system
was patently not designed to deal with big data.  Collecting vast
quantities of information and making it available to doctors will simply
overflow the decision-making process.   To make big data a useful
addition to the physician's toolkit requires a new kind of platform with
the ability to digest data.  

This is where AI and algorithms come in handy - but not, as
science-fiction may have us believe, as a robotic fantasy in which a
computer will tell the patient what to do.  AI and algorithms need to
integrate patient-generated data and develop clinically relevant metrics
that can triage millions of data points for thousands of patients, and
alert doctors only to those patients that require a relevant
intervention at any given moment.   Providing an holistic but simple
picture will allow a clinician to quickly and easily view
patient-generated data in the context of other medical information -
such as lab tests, genetics or clinical history; the original clinical
plan; and his or her medical criteria, to ensure that the system
provides the relevant "nudge" a patient needs to stay on course. 
Similarly, when the patient comes for their periodic check-up, AI and
algorithms will transform unstructured data gathered over the previous
weeks and months into a coherent outlook, that doctor and patient can
use as a base for a richer and more insightful discussion and plan.

Personalized medicine represents the tailoring of medical approach and
treatment to the individual characteristics of each patient and is
expected to become the paradigm of future healthcare.  It will become a
reality not by replacing physicians with expert systems, but through
expanding the doctor-patient relationship and providing powerful data
tools that can inform therapeutic decisions and pathways. 

A useful analogy comes from an unlikely source: chess.  In 1997, when
Garry Kasparov famously lost against IBM's Big Blue, many predicted the
demise of chess grandmasters.   Today, more than 20 years later, as
chess engines have become even stronger and more sophisticated in their
understanding, there is no human player who can beat the best chess
engines, even World Chess Champion Magnus Carlsen.  And yet, there are
more and better chess grandmasters than ever, empowered by being able to
train with these machines.   Computers, partnering with humans, have
taken chess to a completely different level.   Nowadays, a chess player
that didn't take advantage of this technology would simply not be able
to compete.

A similar process will take place in medicine.  Algorithms, biosensors
and AI cannot replace physicians.   But doctors that passionately
embrace digital technologies will certainly replace those who do not
:::

\

Copyright 2020 Axenya Holdings Inc.

###### Headquarters

Zonamerica, Celebra Of 103\
12200 Montevideo, Uruguay
:::

::: {.col-sm-3}
###### Contact Details

<info@axenya.com>
:::

::: {.col-sm-3}
###### Find Us

::: {.social}
[](https://www.linkedin.com/company/axenya/)
[](https://axenya.medium.com)
[](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCTNCc6NPbItZjE8QvgK-FaQ)
:::
:::

::: {.col-sm-3}
###### Newsletter

###### []{#footerNewsletterEmailMsg}
:::
:::

::: {.copy}
::: {.row}
::: {.col-sm-6}
![Axenya](https://axenya.com/resources/img/logo-footer.png) Axenya
Holdings Inc ©2021 . All Rights Reserved \| [Terms &
Conditions](https://axenya.com/tycs/)
:::

::: {.col-sm-6 .text-right}
[Cared by WeAreDNA.Studio](https://wearedna.studio)
:::
