[This Ultramarathon Runner is Redefining What an Athlete Looks Like]
====================================================================

Mirna Valerio thinks everyone deserves to explore the outdoors in the bodies they have.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mirna Valerio is challenging stereotypes in the running world and
bringing a community of body-positive athletes along with her.

[This Ultramarathon Runner is Redefining What an Athlete Looks Like]
====================================================================

Mirna Valerio thinks everyone deserves to explore the outdoors in the bodies they have.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

By [[[**[Gulnaz
Khan]{itemprop="name"}**](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/contributors/k/gulnaz-khan.html)]{.byline-component__contributors}]{}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

“I’m good in my big body.”

That’s what [Mirna
Valerio](https://www.instagram.com/themirnavator/)—ultramarathon runner,
author, and educator—wants her naysayers to know. In 2017, her story
went viral and Valerio was subjected to both praise and public scrutiny.
Despite racism and body-shaming, she continues challenging stereotypes
and inspiring others to do the same.

“I think that people are really having trouble grappling with the idea
that fit comes in many forms and that people can still participate in
athletics no matter what kind of body they have,” she says. “I want to
continue sticking my big ass into places where people think I don’t
belong. That has been the nature of my life—I’m going to do it and I’m
going to do it proudly.”

**A LIFELONG LOVE**
-------------------

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

When Valerio was eight years old, she watched the Brooklyn skyline
shrink into the distance from a bus window. It was the beginning of
lifelong appreciation for the outdoors. Concrete edifices and blaring
horns made way to the lush Catskill mountains, where she spent the next
month at sleepaway camp.

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

“I fell in love with swimming in the lake, and hiking, and just being
outside all day—even when it was raining,” Valerio says. “I remember the
sights and the smells … all that is so firmly etched in my memory.”

</div>

<div class="promo section betaRelatedContentList">

<div class="right-rail-position bumper--bottom bumper--add-margin">

<div class="related-content-list-rebrand__init"
data-pestle-module="beta_related_content_list">

</div>

[]{.bumper--top .bumper--add-margin}

</div>

</div>

<div class="rightRailSlot section">

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

It was a time of discovery—of her own strength and athleticism, and of
the intrinsic peace she found through nature.

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

Valerio was a member of the field hockey and lacrosse teams during high
school, but, as a freshman, she found a new type of comfort in running.
“It was different than playing team sports. I’m an introvert by nature,
so it was a way for me to start the day on my own using my body and just
get my blood flowing. It just made me feel really good.”

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

After college, Valerio experienced several stressors in her career and
personal life. She stopped exercising and gained weight.

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

“We’re always working. Everything’s about work, everything’s about
making money, so we don’t create enough time and space in our lives to
be outdoors and to be away from the daily grind,” she says.

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

When Valerio decided to take up running again years later, she had a new
challenge to contend with.

</div>

<div class="imageGroup section">

[]{.bumper--bottom .bumper--add-margin}
<div data-pestle-module="ImageGroup">

</div>

[]{.bumper--top}

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

**CONTENDING WITH CRITICS**
---------------------------

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

“I’ve never had any body image issues … that wasn’t a thing in my family
culture or schools that I went to,” she says. “I didn’t start getting
comments until I would show up at these races and say things like, ‘I
don’t believe you’re still out here,’ ‘You’re kind of heavy to be
running, you should walk,’ or ‘You’re going to ruin your knees.’”

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

When [*Fat Girl Running*](http://fatgirlrunning-fatrunner.blogspot.com/)
started gaining attention, those voices were amplified. Valerio started
the blog in 2012 while training for her first marathon as a way to share
stories with her friends and family. Her following grew, and so did the
negative comments.

</div>

<div class="image parbase section">

[]{.bumper--bottom .bumper--add-margin}
<div id="13lpckhk" data-pagewide-presentation-disabled="false">

<div class="placeholder-image-wrap"
style="padding-bottom: 63.134765625%">

<div class="picturefill" data-pestle-module="PictureFill">

</div>

</div>

[View Images]{.hide-from-mobile}

</div>

<div class="media__caption--text">

[]{itemprop="caption"}
Valerio, also an author and educator, runs a forested trail in Georgia.

Photograph by Jenny Nichols

</div>

<div data-pestle-module="CaptionTruncation">

</div>

[]{.bumper--top .bumper--top_addthis}

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

“I think there’s some inherent racism and sexism going on, especially
with body image and body shape. They don’t like to see me on a cover of
a magazine because I do not represent what fitness means to them.”

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

But Valerio says she isn’t going anywhere—an unwavering spirit that
solidified her place as a 2018 Adventurer of the Year.

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

“Mirna is the definition of a trailblazer. She is redefining what a
runner looks like and she's doing it with style, grace and a huge
smile,” says visual storyteller [Jenny
Nichols](http://pongomediaproductions.com/), who nominated her for the
distinction. “The press that Mirna has been getting lately is placing
her squarely in the public eye and providing the public with a positive
role model. She gets messages from people who do not fit the ‘runner’
mold to say that she is the reason they get outside, that now they know
that they too can engage in the running community.”

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

Nichols and Sarah Menzies were so inspired by Mirna's story, they made a
film about her. Funded by REI, *[The
Mirnavator](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c5-CSQcYeXk)* is playing
online and being shown at film festivals.

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

**CHALLENGING STEREOTYPES**
---------------------------

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

“Maybe some people are tired of seeing me in the media, but if what I’m
doing and my body is changing the way one person thinks about what
bodies can look like and what bodies can do, then I’m going to keep
doing it—I don’t care what you think,” she says.

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

She has since built a large, supportive community and is dedicated to
creating positive messaging around health and fitness.

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

“There’s all of this self-deprecating chatter, this fearful chatter
about engaging in athletic activity because of all these stories that
they tell themselves, that people have told them—all the narratives they
have in their minds about who is an athlete and who isn’t,” she says.

</div>

<div class="inline section">

<div class="gallery--init media--small"
data-pestle-module="InlineGallery">

</div>

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

Valerio believes seeing is believing and there needs to be a cultural
shift. She thinks if there are more diverse representations of fitness
in the media, it would reduce people’s self-doubts.

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

“We are much more than our bodies. Whether it’s body image, our choices
to be moms or not, our career choices—we are more than our bodies,”
Valerio says. “We’re so powerful beyond our wildest dreams.”

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

Looking back on her childhood, Valerio, a teacher for 18 years, also
stresses the importance of providing youth with opportunities to get
outside—a space where they can discover their own physical and mental
strength. She is proponent of investing in green spaces in cities and
supporting more private-public funding for school field trips.

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

“It’s not just a necessity for urban kids, but it’s a necessity for kids
all over no matter what their level of privilege is and no matter what
their level of exposure and access is,” she says. “Whenever I think of
the outdoors, it’s not only a place to be myself and live in my
introverted ways, but I also look at the outdoors as a place of bonding
with other people and having these really deep, profound experiences
with nature that you can’t have looking out a window.”

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

Valerio plans to continue advocating for body positivity, outdoor
education, and personal health. She’s currently training for her first
international marathon in the Azores Islands and has several others
planned in the coming year.

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

“I know there’s going to be ups and downs,” Valerio says. “That’s the
beautiful challenge of running long races. I think they really prepare
you for difficult things in life.”

</div>

<div class="parbase smartbody section text">

*Follow Mirna on Instagram
[@TheMirnavator](https://www.instagram.com/themirnavator/?hl=en) and her
blog [Fat Girl Running](http://fatgirlrunning-fatrunner.blogspot.com/).
Her book, [A Beautiful Work in
Progress](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/34312042-a-beautiful-work-in-progress),
was published in October 2017.*

</div>

</div>

<div class="siblingCarousel">

</div>

<div class="content-well-container">

<div class="publishDate pubDate">

<div
class="byline-component__publish byline-component__publish--bottom">

PUBLISHED March 1, 2018

</div>

</div>

<div class="AddThis">

<div class="add-this__init" data-pestle-module="AddThis">

</div>

</div>

<div id="contributor-portal-target">

</div>

<div class="contributors contributorCards">

<div data-pestle-module="ContributorCard">

</div>

</div>

</div>

[]{.bumper--bottom}
<div class="parsys beta-promos">

<div class="moreOnThisTopic section">

<div class="more-on-this-topic-promos__init"
data-pestle-module="more_on_this_topic">

</div>

</div>

<div class="readThisNext section">

[]{.bumper--bottom}
<div class="read-this-next-promos__init"
data-pestle-module="read_this_next_list">

</div>

[]{.bumper--top}

</div>

</div>

<div id="ngs-email-signup" class="ngs-email-signup">

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="smart-body__read-more" class="content-well-container">

[Continue Reading]{.show-more-button__text}

</div>

<div id="or-read-this" class="content-well-container">

</div>

</div>

<div class="infiniteFeed">

<div class="feed-section-promos__init"
data-pestle-module="infiniteFeed">

</div>

</div>

<div class="print-only clearfix">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](/etc/designs/platform/v2/images/logos/ng-black-logo.ngsversion.gaTJDG7r.png){.print-logo
.print-img}
© 1996-2018 National Geographic Society.

</div>

<div class="listicleController">

<div data-pestle-module="Listicle">

</div>

</div>

<div data-pestle-module="Truncation">

</div>

<div class="email-signup-contextual email-signup-generic">

<div id="footer-generic-email-signup" class="email-signup">

</div>

</div>

<div class="betaGlobalFooter globalFooter">

<div class="global-footer" data-pestle-module="GlobalFooter">

</div>

</div>

[]{.bumper--bottom .bumper--leaderboard}

</div>

</div>
