Thirty inspirational cycling quotes to get you riding 
=====================================================

Why should you get out and ride? Because The Cannibal says so... 
----------------------------------------------------------------

![](https://cdn.roadcyclinguk.com/images/featured-image-placeholder.png?20180827-02)
![](https://cdn.roadcyclinguk.com/author_post/5ae09888c7bb2.jpeg)

### by [Colin Henrys](/author/colin-henrys/ "Colin Henrys for Road Cycling UK") 

![](https://cdn.roadcyclinguk.com/images/featured-image-placeholder.png?20180827-02){.lazyload}
![](https://cdn.roadcyclinguk.com/featured_image/5ab93f1ec9428.jpg)

### Published: Wednesday 25th November 2015 {#published-wednesday-25th-november-2015 .article-published}

[Cycling is one ]{.article-first}of the most accessible sports on the
planet, but it can also be one of the most brutal, from amateurs testing
themselves to the limit in a sportive to professionals competing in the
toughest races in the world.

It's also a sport which gives anyone who takes to two wheels an enormous
sense of freedom. Leaving the stresses of daily life and pedaling away
without a care in the world, whether it's in your local lanes or high in
the mountains miles from civilisation. There's little that can beat the
beautiful simplicity of a bike ride.

![Eddy Merckx came unstuck on the climb of Pra Loup and it returns to
the race for the third time this
year](https://cdn.roadcyclinguk.com/images/content-image-placeholder.png?20180827-02 "Eddy Merckx came unstuck on the climb of Pra Loup and it returns to the race for the third time this year"){.lazyload}
![Eddy Merckx came unstuck on the climb of Pra Loup and it returns to
the race for the third time this
year](https://cdn.roadcyclinguk.com/embedded_full/5abcfe135384a.jpg "Eddy Merckx came unstuck on the climb of Pra Loup and it returns to the race for the third time this year")

It's a sport which inspires - and the great and good of cycling have
produced no shortage of quotes over the years which sum up the beauty
and joy, freedom and escapism, pain and suffering, that are part and
parcel of life on two wheels.

Need some inspiration to get out on the bike? Words of wisdom on how to
push yourself to the next level? Or just want a shortcut into the minds
of some of the greatest riders in the history of cycling? Look no
further...

### “Cyclists see considerably more of this beautiful world than any other class of citizens. A good bicycle, well applied, will cure most ills this flesh is heir to" - *Dr K.K. Doty* 

### “The race is won by the rider who can suffer the most" - *Eddy Merckx* 

### “Cycling isn’t a game, it's a sport. Tough, hard and unpitying, and it requires great sacrifices. One plays football, or tennis, or hockey. One doesn’t play at cycling" - *Jean de Gribaldy* 

### “When the spirits are low, when the day appears dark, when work becomes monotonous, when hope hardly seems worth having, just mount a bicycle and go out for a spin down the road, without thought on anything but the ride you are taking" - *Arthur Conan Doyle* 

### “It is by riding a bicycle that you learn the contours of a country best, since you have to sweat up the hills and coast down them" - *Ernest Hemingway* 

-   [** Twitter](https://twitter.com/roadcyclinguk "Twitter")
-   [**     Instagram](https://instagram.com/roadcyclinguk "Instagram")
