I've mutated from a mechanical cold insensible robot to a non happy non fitter sensible irate pirate. Well, the past 3 months my baby went through adaptation starting kinder garden with only a year. After the adaptation and a week or two sick she's cot accustomed to being picked up ir arms and cuddling in bed. Hence: fathers with no sleep may turn oddly impatient and even a bit violent, although still in civilization's acceptable degree.


Another practice that has actually gone pretty well has been walking back and forth to work with a total of nearly 6 K per day, which totals some 100-120K per month. You could also add some distance on weekends and seems a good basis for racing at a slow steady pace.

# Netflix vs Sleep

Turns out that setting priorities comes ever more clear when you run out of hours of the day to function. That is, you can be a good worker that has no problem with awaking early and setting to do your duty. But on the other hand, the average person will need to go to bed early if they expect to have a certain amount of rest hours. This last point is my Achilles heel.

# 2020 || The year with no ...

Sugar Flour Meat Salt Not!

Rather the year began as of little to no Sleep. Hoping it will change.

# Easy Elegant Doable

Easy is the way that we want things to be. And we've always heard that things are hard. But, if you break things down to small pieces, you can go a long way. This is the philosophy of Tim Ferriss at @richroll's podcast.

The good thing about thinking as a programmer is that you don't put adjectives: you can do it or not. You can.
