# Meet up with Michael Schillmeier and Mike Michael

### 2018-06-08

* The reunion mainly reviewed the path to what could be the core conceptual aim of the thesis.
* Reviewing topics was the way to detect some main trails departing from the empirical material.
* Then came clear some of the methodological concerns to take into account as well as examples from available data.
* Next meeting was scheduled a month ahead with a milestone of 5000 words to be sent 5 days prior to meeting.
* The topic of the writing would be focused on reviewing empirical data: books, magazines and journals by and on ultra runners. This review should bring together some main topics and questions that can be framed as research questions to lead to further conceptualizations on the topic of ultra running. 
* Subjects tackled in the meeting and into consideration for questioning:
	+ Is running ultra transformative? According to many moralizers it is. According to the 2 man gang that just ran a 100 miler it was a goal to be tackled and then move on to something else. Intermittent native of interest here.
	+ Is running ultra a solely urban or rural endeavour? Consider trespassing boundaries between borderlands: urban/rural/wild. And how the may collapse into each other.
	+ Running can break things and people. It can brake the human body, the human spirit, break relationships when runners are rude to the outer world and don't even greet friends when in the run. Running can be disruptive with people and things. Also "breaking the wall" is a way in which the body is constantly being made, or doesn't make it. Consider the *burned out* phase.
	+ Does running ultimately provide solitude, or socializing among pairs, group, with baby and family, etc.?
	+ How do things work/interact/intersect around bodies? Running spatializes, and allows the creation of modes of existence: corporeal, embodied, phenomenological.
	+ It is possible to hallucinate when salts and minerals drop and on risk of hyponathremia. Is this desirable, searched, prevented from? 
	+ Is running ultra healthy? The massive kill of oxygen cells is considered to be a *practice of death*. Depending on the impact of overall health one could imply that extensive effort could produce an earlier death.
	+ The influence of environment can be harsh. Due to natural incidents, such as severe and sudden changes of temperature runners can suffer these shifts in bodily temperature. The run-stop-run-stop sequence can even be an additional problem that further worsens ambient conditions.
	+ Equipments can also influence the way in which runners (as climbers have been documented), define their types, hierarchies, styles, standardization, and so on.
	+ Apps can help to visualize and control metrics, ie., check if you are already dead.
	+ Do runners and ultra runners see themselves as separate groups? Or is there more of a continuum among the practices? 
	+ What are the personal characteristics developed for running ultra? It is hinted all over the data that it is a crazy idea to go so long, and the idea that being stubborn turns into a positive value is present as well.
	+ What are the rhythms of running ultra: is it all running, or is some walking rather included by sections? One could consider running ultra as a punctuated activity, with stops and re-starts as a subgenre of running. Also there could be differences and similitude between the elite professionals and the layman who goes ultra. There is abundant material on the topic of rhythms by foot in the academic walking literature. 
	+ A resistant mindset is a given in the ultra running data. One could not but the least ask what are the future implications of such kind of sacrifices that ultra demands. This may vary depending on the level of competitiveness of each racer, each race, and level of professionalization. The latter also possibly being related to the risk of using, or not, drugs to enhance performance. And sponsors can as well push in one direction or another of taking enhancement measures (also technological, gears, etc.). On the range of professional sportsmen who go through extreme efforts is Boris Becker who had his feet bones visible after a harsh competition. [Note: I don't want that, rather the opposite].
	+ How do ultra runners deal with science? Link lay expertise with credited-experiential.
