# The New Yorker

[January 12, 2015 Issue](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/01/12/outside-game "Published in January 12, 2015")

The Outside Game {#the-outside-game .ArticleHeader__hed___GPB7e}
================

How the sociologist Howard Becker studies the conventions of the unconventional. {#how-the-sociologist-howard-becker-studies-the-conventions-of-the-unconventional. .ArticleHeader__dek___2rbDs}
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### By [Adam Gopnik](/contributors/adam-gopnik "Adam Gopnik"){.Link__link___3dWao}

![Celebrated in France, the piano-playing scholar changed how we think about “deviance.” | Illustration by Simon Prades](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/5909650c1c7a8e33fb38d308/master/w_727,c_limit/150112_r25989.jpg "Celebrated in France, the piano-playing scholar changed how we think about “deviance.” | Illustration by Simon Prades")

Americans <span data-page="page_1"></span>have often had strange and
serendipitous careers in Paris, from Thomas Evans, the Philadelphia
dentist who cured Emperor Louis-Napoleon of a toothache and became an
indispensable ornament of the Imperial court, to those African-American
jazzmen, like the great soprano-sax player Sidney Bechet, whose careers
were revived, and reputations nurtured, in France in ways they never
could have been in America. But few have known an odder trajectory than
Howie—“Only my mother ever called me Howard”—Becker. Howard S. Becker,
to give him his full, honorary-degree name—he has six—has been a major
figure in American sociology for more than sixty years. Now a brisk
eighty-six, he remains most famous for the studies collected in his book
“Outsiders,” of 1963, which transformed sociologists’ ideas of what it
means to be a “deviant.” In America’s academic precincts, he is often
seen as a sort of Richard Feynman of the social sciences, notable for
his street smarts, his informal manner, and his breezy, pungent prose
style—a Northwestern professor who was just as at home playing piano in
saloons. (Indeed, the observations that put him on the path to academic
fame, on the subculture of marijuana smokers, began while he was playing
jazz piano in Chicago strip joints. “Not burlesque houses,” he says.
“These were strip joints.”)

Yet it is his position in France that is truly astonishing. Two critical
biographies of Becker have been published in French in the past decade,
and “Beckerisme” has become an ideology to conjure with. YouTube videos
capture him speaking heavily accented Chicago French to student
audiences, and he now spends a good part of every year in Paris, giving
seminars and holding court. His work is required reading in many French
universities, even though it seems to be a model of American pragmatism,
preferring narrow-seeming “How?” and “Who, exactly?” questions to the
deeper “Why?” and “What?” supposedly favored by French theory. That may
be exactly its appeal, though: for the French, Becker seems to combine
three highly American elements—jazz, Chicago, and the exotic beauties of
empiricism.

This summer, Becker published a summing up of his life’s method and
beliefs, called “What About Mozart? What About Murder?” (The title
refers to the two caveats or complaints most often directed against his
kind of sociology’s equable “relativism”: how can you study music as a
mere social artifact—what about Mozart? How can you consider criminal
justice a mutable convention—what about Murder?) The book is both a
jocular personal testament of faith and a window into Becker’s beliefs.
His accomplishment is hard to summarize in a sentence or catchphrase,
since he’s resolutely anti-theoretical and suspicious of “models” that
are too neat. He wants a sociology that observes the way people act
around each other as they really do, without expectations about how they
ought to. Over the decades, this has led him to do close, almost
novelistic studies of jazz musicians, medical students, painters, and
photographers.

Among sociologists, he’s most famous for having made sociology’s
previous theories of “deviance” look deviant: studying obscure or out
groups, he has shown that the way their members act together follows the
same kinds of rules that everyone else follows. Some people may march to
a different drummer—but, when they do, they’re usually all marching in
rhythm, too. As one of his students has written, “Rather than asking the
less than fruitful question of why people break rules, Becker came to
focus on how people go through an identifiable process to *choose* to
break rules.” A Beckerian analysis of a social “world” asks how, in any
culture or subculture, someone comes to be called an insider while
someone else gets pushed outside. Simple as it is, this approach has
proved immensely influential in the study of everything from drug
addiction to queer theory. Basically, Becker believes that Yogi Berra
was right: you really can observe the most by watching. Heather Love, a
professor of English at Penn who specializes in gender and sexuality
studies, points out that it shares “many of the same concerns, about
institutions, power, the dynamics of social relations” as contemporary
post-structuralist research, “but all in this kind of homegrown,
ordinary language, a ‘just the facts, ma’am’ style that has the appeal
of American noir and hardboiled fiction.”

Not long ago, in an apartment that he and his wife, Dianne Hagaman, had
taken for the fall in the Fifth Arrondissement—the neighborhood of Paris
that clusters around the old Sorbonne—he sat and talked about his life’s
work and its apotheosis in Paris, almost as a spectator of his own
surprising career. As long-faced and dry-eyed as a stoical silent
comedian, Becker is game to talk about anything. A conversation with him
becomes an inimitable spool of bebop piano tips, Chicago history,
sociological minutiae, and meditations on French intellectual life, with
helpful detours into strip-club culture in the forties and the reasons
that French professors think of themselves as civil servants while
American ones imagine themselves as entrepreneurs.

“I always really wanted to be a piano player,” he begins. “When I was
about twelve, I heard boogie-woogie for the first time and fell in love
with it. My folks had bought a piano for show, and I bought a book of
boogie-woogie and taught myself to play it, more or less. And then I met
some kids in the neighborhood—you see, I went to Austin High.” Austin
High was the citadel of Chicago jazz,<span data-page="page_2"></span>
where, in the twenties, Bud Freeman had helped create a form of excited,
driven white-folks jazz that remained influential through the swing era.
“I got jobs for people who couldn’t afford real
musicians—thirteen-year-old kids playing for other thirteen-year-old
kids.” Then he got into a better band, which was racially mixed. “That
was a big thing,” he says. “Because we were racially mixed, we played
only black dances. The kids who were at the black dances, if you didn’t
play those pieces exactly the way they were on the record, you were in
trouble. So I took lessons from Lennie Tristano. When I met him, he was
in his late twenties and had already stopped playing in public—he
wouldn’t put up with anything other than perfect playing conditions,
with the result that he almost never played.”

Tristano, who was a saxophonist as well as a pianist, was the Glenn
Gould of bebop: difficult, hypersensitive, reclusive, and hugely gifted.
“Instead of teaching ‘freedom,’ or creativity, Tristano taught me a set
of practices that create the feeling of what an improvisation ought to
sound like,” Becker says. Tristano taught simple ways of solving puzzles
that come up in improvising—for instance, ways of adding flatted fifths
and minor ninths to otherwise too familiar chord sequences. “He showed
how to create an essentially unlimited set of possibilities to work with
as I played through an evening in a bar,” Becker recalls. Jazz solos, he
learned from his models, were concocted almost entirely “from a small
collection of ‘crips,’ short phrases that can be combined in a million
ways, subjected to all possible variations.” The lesson that social
performance, even of the highest kind, was more a string of crips than
an outpouring of confessions remained at the root of Becker’s
understanding of the way the world works.

Knowing that his father, a first-generation Jewish immigrant, would
“have a kitten” at the thought of his son spending his life playing
piano in saloons, Becker enrolled in the University of Chicago—then at
the height of its Robert Hutchins-era reputation as a citadel of great
books and no sports—so that he could be seen to study all day in order
to be free to play jazz all night. “I started working strip joints on
Clark Street—all the grownups were in the Army. We played the one
independent, non-Mob-owned joint. Guys would come in from the
hybrid-seed-corn convention and spend three or four thousand dollars
buying drinks for the girls. Then they’d go away happy.”

He planned to get a graduate degree in English while continuing his jazz
life, and then one day he stumbled on a new book, “Black Metropolis: A
Study of Negro Life in a Northern City”—the northern city being
Chicago—by St. Clair Drake and Horace Cayton. It was one of the first
in-depth studies of contemporary urban life. “It was wonderful, the
whole idea of being an urban anthropologist!” Becker says. “You could be
an anthropologist, a very romantic thing, but you didn’t have to go away
to do it. Some of the anthropologists I knew lost half their teeth. Not
nice. I thought, Wow! If I just wrote down what I was doing at night,
just what everyone said and what I observed, then those were field
notes.”



Those “field notes” gathered at the strip clubs and night spots helped
inspire a seminal paper of 1953, “Becoming a Marihuana User,” in the
*American Journal of Sociology*. (Asked if he knew so much because he
was smoking weed himself, he says, “Yeah. Obviously.” And does he still
smoke it? “Yeah. Obviously.”) Becker insists that his accomplishment in
the paper was no more than the elimination of a single needless
syllable: “Instead of talking about drug abuse, I talked about drug
*use*.” “Deviance” had long been a preoccupation of sociology and its
mother field, anthropology. Most “deviance theory” took it for granted
that if you did weird things you were a weird person. Normal people made
rules—we’ll crap over here, worship over here, have sex like so—which a
few deviants in every society couldn’t keep. They clung together in
small bands of misbehavior.

Becker’s work set out to show that out-groups weren’t made up of people
who couldn’t keep the rules; they were made up of people who kept other
kinds of rules. Marijuana smoking, too, was a set of crips, a learned
activity and a social game. At a time when the general assumption was
that drug use was private and compulsive, Becker argued that you had to
*learn* how to get high. Smoking weed, he showed, was most often strange
or unpleasant at first. One of his informants (a fellow band member)
reported, “I walked around the room, walking around the room trying to
get off, you know; it just scared me at first, you know. I wasn’t used
to that kind of feeling.” Another musician explained, “You have to just
talk them out of being afraid. Keep talking to them, reassuring, telling
them it’s all right. And come on with your own story, you know: ‘The
same thing happened to me. You’ll get to like that after a while.’ ” In
the sociologese that Becker had not yet entirely discarded, he wrote,
“Given these typically frightening and unpleasant first experiences, the
beginner will not continue use unless he learns to redefine the
sensations as pleasurable.” He went on, “This redefinition occurs,
typically,<span data-page="page_3"></span> in interaction with more
experienced users, who, in a number of ways, teach the novice to find
pleasure in this experience, which is at first so frightening.” What
looked like a deviant act by an escape-seeking individual was simply a
communal practice shaped by a common enterprise: it takes a strip club
to smoke a reefer.

The lessons learned in the night clubs remain present even today. In his
new Mozart/Murder book, Becker points out the continuities between the
middle-class housewives of the early twentieth century who became
addicted to the opium products then sold over the counter for “women’s
troubles” and black youths who now take essentially the same kinds of
drug, in a different world: “When middle-class women could buy opium,
they did, and they got addicted. When they couldn’t, they didn’t. When
poor black boys could buy it, they did, and they got addicted, too.” In
Becker’s work, a small realism of social scenes replaces the melodrama
of personal pathology.

Becker also points out that any social group, insider or outsider, ends
by divorcing itself from the group it’s supposed to be serving.
“Everyone has an ideal student or audience in mind, and we never get
them,” he points out. This makes teachers impatient with students, and
jazz musicians suspicious of audiences. Jazz musicians smoked weed to
get high, but one of the effects was to set them off from the
night-club-going customers they despised. “This insight looks original
only now,” Becker says. “If you were playing, that was all you heard:
‘Fucking squares, now look what they want!’ I remember learning to leave
the stand quickly, before any one could ask me to play ‘Melancholy
Baby.’ That was the stuff of every minute of what you were doing.” He
adds, “The originality—I shouldn’t even call it that—was to pay
attention to it as something worth talking about.”

![“The bagels—they just keep getting bigger, no?”](https://media.newyorker.com/cartoons/593b5ee2ba20a654ac5d4424/master/w_727,c_limit/150112_a18727.jpg)

This insight turned out to apply to a lot more than marijuana smokers.
“My dissertation supervisor, Everett Hughes, loved the idea that
anything you see in the lowly kind of work is there in privileged work,
too, only they don’t talk about it,” he says. “Later on, he went to the
American nurses’ association and they hired him as a consultant, and he
said, ‘Let’s do some real research: why don’t you talk about how nurses
hate patients?’ There was a shocked silence and then someone said, ‘How
did you know that?’ ”

The influence of Becker’s early work remains profound. A presidential
lecture he gave in 1966 at the annual meeting of the Society for the
Study of Social Problems, entitled “Whose Side Are We On?,” is still a
clarion in the field. Gayle Rubin, a professor of anthropology at
Michigan and a leading scholar of L.G.B.T. studies, praises it as a
pioneering attempt at “moral levelling,” where the old prudish act of
exposing deviants and curing them of deviance changed to the project of
finding out what deviants did, and why it was, on inspection, usually no
more deviant than what the rest of us did. “That stuff at Chicago in the
fifties really lit the way for so much of what came after,” Rubin says.
“There’s a real renaissance of it now.”

Becker insists that he never entirely intended to stay in academia: “It
was only after I finished the Ph.D. that I more or less realized that my
choice now was to be the most educated piano player on Sixty-third
Street or start taking sociology more seriously.” Suspicious of the
administrative details of academic life, he lived on research grants,
passing from college campus to institutional setting—“For fourteen or
fifteen years, I was what was called a ‘research bum.’ ” Following the
lead of his first wife, Nan Harris, who was a ceramic sculptor, he
decided to write about the visual arts. “But I had this disability—I
couldn’t draw!” he says. Living in San Francisco for a while, he took up
photography instead, and was lucky enough to have as the “lab monitor,”
who mixed chemicals and helped students, a young woman named Annie
Leibovitz. His experiences as a working photographer, like his earlier
ones as a working jazzman, illuminated what eventually became his second
important book, “Art Worlds” (1982), which advanced a collaborative view
of picture-making. Like reefer-smoking among jazz musicians, artmaking
was not the business of solitary artists, inspired by visions, but a
social enterprise in which a huge range of people played equally
essential roles in order to produce an artifact that a social group
decided to dignify as art. Art, like weed, exists only within a world.

It was a quarter-century ago, with the publication of “Art Worlds” and
“Outsiders” in France, that the strange second act of Becker’s career
began. His books became a magnetic pole around which dissident French
sociologists could gather. A group of social scientists calling
themselves L’École de Chicago de Paris translated “Outsiders,” and saw
it become a campus best-seller. (Becker: “I think because it worked well
as a textbook, being sort of leftish—really, just unconventional about
things like deviance—and easy to read, which was a great combination to
give to undergraduates.”) But the book also provided a means to combat
the man who, for a generation, had been the dominant figure in French
social science, Pierre Bourdieu.

Becker’s role as the American not-Bourdieu is so essential to his
reputation in<span data-page="page_4"></span> France that, in talking
about Becker, one invariably also talks about his other. Bourdieu, who
died in 2002, was a sociologist whose work—brilliantly disenthralled or
grimly determinist, depending on your perspective—explained all social
relations as power relations, even in a seemingly open world of “free
expression” like the visual arts. For Bourdieu, whose book “Distinction:
A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste” (1979) remains a classic
text on the sociology of culture, a dominant class reproduces itself by
enforcing firm rules about what is and is not acceptable, and creates a
closed, exclusive language to describe it: those who have power decide
what counts as art, and to enter that field at all is possible for
outsiders only if they learn to repeat the words that construct its
values.

One of the most agitated debates in French social science today is
between Bourdieu’s and Becker’s conceptions of the realm in which our
lives take place. Bourdieu believed that all social life takes place in
a “field” and Becker insists that it takes place within a “world”—an
opposition that irresistibly brings to mind Woody Allen’s remark that
while Democritus called the indivisible units of the universe “atoms”
Leibniz called them “monads,” and that fortunately the two men never met
or there would have been an extremely dull argument. The argument about
fields and worlds, as Becker freely admits, is a bit like that one—both
are generalized metaphors—but he also thinks it can be saved from a mere
dispute over nomenclature.

“Bourdieu’ s big idea was the *champs*, field, and mine was *monde*,
world—what’s the difference?” Becker asks rhetorically. “Bourdieu’s idea
of field is kind of mystical. It’s a metaphor from physics. I always
imagined it as a zero-sum game being played in a box. The box is full of
little things that zing around. And he doesn’t speak about people. He
just speaks about forces. There aren’t any people doing anything.”
People in Bourdieu’s field are merely atom-like entities. (It was
Bourdieu’s vision that helped inspire Michel Houellebecq’s nihilistic
novel of the meaningless collisions of modern life, “The Elementary
Particles.”)

“Mine is a view that—well, it takes a village to write a symphony and
get it performed,” Becker goes on. “It’s not just the composer. The
great case for me is in film, because nobody ever figured out who the
real artist is: the screenwriter or the director or who? Or, rather,
*everybody* figured it out, but never figured out the same thing. Early
on when I was reading about art, I read a book by Aljean Harmetz on the
making of ‘The Wizard of Oz.’ She was the daughter of someone in the
wardrobe department of M-G-M, and she explains that there were four
directors of that film, and the guys who thought of the crucial thing,
the change from black-and-white to color when the characters enter Oz,
were the composer and the lyricist! In an important way, I took the list
of credits at the end of a Hollywood film as my model of how artistic
creation really happens.”

As Becker has written elsewhere, enlarging the end-credits metaphor, “A
‘world’ as I understand it consists of real people who are trying to get
things done, largely by getting other people to do things that will
assist them in their project. . . . The resulting collective activity is
something that perhaps no one wanted, but is the best everyone could get
out of this situation and therefore what they all, in effect, agreed
to.” In a Beckerian world, we act the way we do because of a certain
logic of events—jazz musicians are supposed to smoke dope, graduate
students learn how to please their supervisors—but there are lots of
different roles within the world, and we can choose which one to play,
and how to play it. We’re all actors, not angels or completely free
agents. But we are looking for applause, so we put on the best show we
can. This view of the world has something in common with that of
Becker’s longtime friend and colleague Erving Goffman. “But Goffman got
more interested in the micro-dramatics of things,” Becker points out,
meaning, for instance, his studies of how people look when they lie. “I
was always more interested in the big picture.”

After a morning’s talk, Becker makes his way, steadily if slowly, around
the corner to his favorite lunchtime bistro, where he is well known,
and, seated at a corner table by the glass façade, orders a *steak*
*frites*. His fingers tap on the tabletop: he still plays the piano, and
plays it well. Just last year, he issued a new CD of himself working
over some standards. “Many years after studying with Lennie,” he
recalls, “I was in New York and on a whim called him up at his home,
somewhere on Long Island. We schmoozed for a while and he congratulated
me on my success as a sociologist and then said, ‘You know? I always
liked the way you played. Why don’t you quit your job and move to New
York and study with me again?’ I had a momentary feeling that, yes,
that’s what I should do! But I overcame it.”

Becker is aware of the irony that, while he remains on the “left” of
American sociology, as a moral leveller, he is on the right of the
French kind, as<span data-page="page_final"></span> an apostle of agency
and action. He is more than willing to apply detached Beckerian analysis
to his role in France. “In France, people say about another professor, I
would cross the street to avoid him! But in America we wouldn’t be on
the same street. A lot of what happens involves the difference in the
size of the country and the centralization of the universities. People
can have hegemony of a sort in an American school, but not really.
You’re going to take over the departments at Berkeley and Stanford and
Harvard and Yale and at all the smaller places where the real energies
are simmering anyway? Doesn’t happen.” He thinks it over for a minute,
between bites of *onglet* and courteous chat with the bistro’s owner.
“You know what the real problem with Bourdieu was? The real problem with
Bourdieu was that he was a schmuck,” he says at last. “Power-hungry and
mean in spirit and obsessed with career.”

Becker tries to observe his own ascendancy in France with the same
detachment with which he observes other people, but his appeal to the
French goes beyond his simply not being Bourdieu. The French myth of
America is as robust as the American myth of France, and one important
element in it is the idea that Americans can arrive intuitively at
results that the French can get to only by thinking a lot. Like the
Hollywood moviemakers whom the French New Wave critics adopted in the
fifties and sixties, Becker is beloved in Paris in part because he
doesn’t seem overencumbered with theory or undue abstraction. As Heather
Love also points out, “U.S. deviance studies has the international
allure of American crime fiction, and with a cool narrator like Becker,
all the better.”

But, to his French admirers, this doesn’t disprove the need for theory;
it just means that sometimes the best theories are left mysteriously
unspoken. That Howard Hawks made so many good movies without actually
having a theory of moviemaking was a strong sign that he must really
have a fantastic theory of the movies, if he would only tell you.
Becker’s reputation is a bit like that: if you can say so many
interesting things just by watching the world, then you must really have
a fantastic set of prescription spectacles, even if no one ever gets to
see you wearing them.

Over lunch, Becker discusses a question that rises above personality
clashes and institutional leanings. The project of moral levelling also
has within it the problem of moral levelling. What is the point of
sociology if it can’t tell us that murder is bad or Mozart is great?
Surely we don’t want to expand our equanimity about out-groups to, say,
the Gambino family, whose rules include whacking people they don’t like,
or the Manson family, who had rules and rituals, too? For Becker,
though, these objections involve a “category mistake.” Yes, murder is
wrong, but why is it the job of social sciences to remind us of that
fact?

“How does it really happen isn’t the only question, sure,” he says.
“It’s just the one with the biggest chance of having an interesting
answer rather than a predictable, safe one. I’m interested in how power
happens, not just saying, ‘Oh, the exercise of power.’ ” One of his
favorite instances of how power works involves the role of the invisible
middlemen who create places for themselves in the muddled center of any
bureaucracy—in Brazil, where he lived for a while, they’re called
*despachantes*, but a student of Becker’s has found close equivalents in
Chicago laundromats, where they ease the burden of the welfare system.
“They get power by knowing the rules on the box in greater detail than
anyone else,” Becker says. “They’re the people you turn to to break the
code of the system. That kind of ‘how’ of power interests me more than
the fact of power.

“What does sociology bring to the table? Well, I’d expand the definition
of sociology. Calvino, in ‘Invisible Cities,’ is a sociologist. Robert
Frank, in ‘The Americans’—that’s sociology. There’s a thing that I’m
sure David Mamet said once, though I’ve never been able to track it to
its source. He was talking about the theatre, and he said that everyone
is in a scene for a reason. Everyone has something he wants. Everyone
has some plan he’s trying to pull off. ‘What’s the reason?’ is the real
question. So that’s what you do. It’s like you’re watching a play and
you—you’re the guy who knows that everyone is there for a reason.” 

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/59097b742179605b11ad8f0c/1:1/w_130,c_limit/gopnik-adam.png)

-   Adam Gopnik, a staff writer, has been contributing to The New Yorker
    since 1986. He is the author of, most recently, “[At the Strangers’
    Gate: Arrivals in New
    York](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1400041805/?tag=thneyo0f-20).”


Never miss a big *New Yorker* story again. Sign up for This Week’s Issue
and get an e-mail every week with the stories you have to read.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

#### [Listen to the New Yorker Radio Hour](/podcast/the-new-yorker-radio-hour){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Buy the Cover](http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Covers-Prints_c147247_.htm){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Play the Crossword](/crossword){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Play the Jigsaw Puzzle](/jigsaw){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [News & Politics](/news)

-   [Daily Comment](/news/daily-comment){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Our Columnists](/news/our-columnists){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [News Desk](/news/news-desk){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Culture](/culture)

-   [Cultural Comment](/culture/cultural-comment){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Culture Desk](/culture/culture-desk){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Goings On About Town](/goings-on-about-town){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [The Critics](/magazine/critics){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Business, Science & Tech](/business)

-   [Currency](/business/currency){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Elements](/tech/elements){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Humor](/humor)

-   [Daily Shouts](/humor/daily-shouts){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Shouts & Murmurs](/magazine/shouts-murmurs){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [The Borowitz Report](/humor/borowitz-report){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Cartoons](/cartoons)

-   [Daily Cartoon](/cartoons/daily-cartoon){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Cartoon Caption
    Contest](http://contest.newyorker.com/){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Cartoon
    Bank](https://condenaststore.com/conde-nast-brand/cartoonbank?utm_medium=referral){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Books & Fiction](/books)

-   [Page-Turner](/books/page-turner){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Books](/magazine/books){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Poems](/magazine/poems){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Fiction](/magazine/fiction){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Magazine](/magazine)

-   [This Week's Issue](/magazine){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Archive](/archive){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Subscribe](/subscribe){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Photography](/tag/photography)

-   [Photo Booth](/culture/photo-booth){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Portfolio](/magazine/portfolio){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Video](http://video.newyorker.com/)

-   [Culture](http://video.newyorker.com/genres/Culture){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Humor](http://video.newyorker.com/genres/Humor){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [News](http://video.newyorker.com/genres/News){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Politics](http://video.newyorker.com/genres/Politics){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Science &
    Tech](http://video.newyorker.com/genres/Science%20&%20Tech){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Sports](http://video.newyorker.com/genres/Sports){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Podcasts](/podcast)

-   [The New Yorker Radio
    Hour](/podcast/the-new-yorker-radio-hour){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Political Scene](/podcast/political-scene){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [The Writer's
    Voice](/podcast/the-authors-voice){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Fiction](/podcast/fiction){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Poetry](/podcast/poetry){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### More

-   [Customer
    Care](http://w1.buysub.com/servlet/CSGateway?cds_mag_code=NYR){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Buy the
    Cover](http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Covers-Prints_c147247_.htm){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Apps](/digital-editions){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Crossword Puzzle](/crossword){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Jigsaw Puzzle](/jigsaw){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [SecureDrop](https://projects.newyorker.com/securedrop/){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Store](http://www.condenaststore.com/~/new-yorker-store){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [RSS](/about/feeds){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Site Map](/sitemap){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Newsletters](https://www.newyorker.com/newsletters)

-   [The
    Daily](https://www.newyorker.com/newsletters/daily-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [The New Yorker
    Recommends](https://www.newyorker.com/newsletters/culture-review-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Daily
    Humor](https://www.newyorker.com/newsletters/send-me-the-cartoon-chronicle-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [John
    Cassidy](https://www.newyorker.com/newsletters/john-cassidy-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [The Borowitz
    Report](https://www.newyorker.com/newsletters/andy-borowitz-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Amy Davidson
    Sorkin](https://www.newyorker.com/home/about/sign-up-for-amy-davidson-sorkins-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Midterms
    2018](https://www.newyorker.com/home/about/sign-up-for-the-new-yorker-midterms-2018-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Food](https://www.newyorker.com/home/about/sign-up-for-the-new-yorker-food-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [UK](https://www.newyorker.com/home/about/sign-up-for-the-new-yorkers-uk-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [About Us](/about/us)

-   [About](/about/us){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Careers](/about/careers){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Contact](/about/contact){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [FAQ](/about/faq){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Media
    Kit](http://www.condenast.com/brands/the-new-yorker){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Press](/about/press){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Accessibility
    Help](/about/accessibility-help/){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### Follow Us

<span role="img" aria-label="copyright icon">©</span> 2019 Condé Nast.
All rights reserved. Use of and/or registration on any portion of this
site constitutes acceptance of our [User
Agreement](https://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy){.Link__link___3dWao}
(updated 5/25/18) and [Privacy Policy and Cookie
Statement](https://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy){.Link__link___3dWao}
(updated 5/25/18). [Your California Privacy
Rights](https://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy-california){.Link__link___3dWao}.
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed,
transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written
permission of Condé Nast. *The New Yorker* may earn a portion of sales
from products and services that are purchased through links on our site
as part of our affiliate partnerships with retailers. [Ad
Choices](http://www.condenast.com/online-behavioral-advertising-oba-and-how-to-opt-out-of-oba/#clickheretoreadmoreaboutonlinebehavioraladvertising(oba)){.Link__link___3dWao}

-   [News](/news){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Culture](/culture){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Books](/books){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Business & Tech](/business){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Humor](/humor){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Cartoons](/cartoons){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Magazine](/magazine){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Video](http://video.newyorker.com){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Podcasts](/podcast){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Archive](/archive){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Goings On](/goings-on-about-town){.Link__link___3dWao}
