[]{#anchor}Vegan runners: can a plant-based diet provide what you need to compete -- and win?
=============================================================================================

##### Fiona Oakes was a lone crusader when she set up a running club for vegans 15 years ago. Now, she holds four world records

[Adharanand Finn](https://www.theguardian.com/profile/adharanandfinn) | \@adharanand

The Guardian - Back to home

[Mon 25 Nov 2019 10.00 GMT](https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2019/nov/25/vegan-runners-can-a-plant-based-diet-provide-what-you-need-to-compete-and-win?CMP=share_btn_tw)

> The number of Vegan Runners club members has shot up in the past three years. Photograph: Vegan Runners

"In 2004, I was the only vegan in the village," says Fiona Oakes, a
[multi-world-record-breaking](https://www.fionaoakesfoundation.co.uk/world-records)
marathon runner. "But now you see vegan runners everywhere."

An animal lover who set up her own [animal
sanctuary](https://www.facebook.com/towerhillstables/), Oakes started a
running club called Vegan Runners in 2004. The idea came about after she
saw the long-distance runner Paula Radcliffe on TV and spotted an
opportunity. Oakes was a good runner and thought that, if she got
faster, she could end up alongside Radcliffe at the start line of the
London marathon, on national television, with the words "Vegan Runners"
emblazoned across her vest.

"It was a way of showcasing the cause," she says. "I'd been vegan since
I was six years old. I'd lost my kneecap from an illness when I was 17
and been told I would never run again. If I could do this as a vegan, it
showed that anything was possible."

Back then she was a lone crusader, trying to introduce people to the
word "vegan" in a positive way. "Rather than cause disruption and be in
people's faces, by running, I was leading by example and generating
interest in a positive way," she says.

She went on to twice finish in the top 20 in major marathons, with a
personal best of two hours 38 minutes, and also won the north pole
marathon. Oakes' powerful example has seen the Vegan Runners steadily
increase their numbers over the years. But with the interest in veganism
growing, partly in response to the global climate crisis, the club's
numbers have swelled exponentially in the past three years; there are
almost 4,000 today, with more than 40 local groups across the country,
their distinctive tops unmissable at races.

![](Pictures/1.jpg){width="300.0pt" height="451.0pt"}

Fiona Oakes, founder of Vegan Runners.

Club activities vary at each branch, but typically involve weekly
training runs and group attendance at events such as local parkruns --
usually with a visit to a vegan cafe afterwards.

Understandably, members are expected to be vegan not just in their diet
but in their choice of clothing. Oakes says that the expectation is for
members to be living a fully plant-based lifestyle.

Mike Exton from Sheffield joined Vegan Runners in June. Although he is
vegan, he primarily joined because the training runs were local. "I do
find it a little tricky being pigeonholed as a vegan runner," he says.
But he feels more comfortable wearing the Vegan Runners vest now than he
might have done five years ago, as veganism has become "less weird".

"In many ways it's just another running club," he says, "though we do
tend to chat about food, recommending things to try and getting advice
on nutrition."

Lisa Gawthorne joined Vegan Runners in 2018. She says it is great to be
surrounded by like-minded people and that the club forms "a really kind
and compassionate running community".

"I think it's important to bounce off people who are going through
similar things to you and to share experiences," she says. "This may
include tips on nutrition or the best vegan running shoes. It all
helps." Most running shoes that don't use leather or suede are vegan,
but sometimes the glues used in shoes can be made from animal products.
The Vegan Runners'
[website](https://vegan8.me/vegan-athletic-shoes/vegan-athletic-shoes-2018/)
has a helpful guide to which brands are fully vegan.

Gawthorne has been vegan for 16 years and is an international road
runner and duathlon athlete. She believes being vegan has helped her to
perform at such a high level. "It improves recovery time, is better for
the digestive system and promotes better sleep," she says. "I have never
had as much energy as I have since moving from a vegetarian to a vegan
diet."

Not everyone shares this view. Tim Noakes, a South African sports
scientist famous for his promotion of a high-fat, meat-rich diet, says a
vegan diet is "incomplete in so many ways". "In time, a truly vegan
athlete will run into trouble unless they are sourcing additional
animal-based nutrients -- such as vitamin B12, iron, choline and
probably high-quality proteins -- from somewhere else," he says.

Dietitian Renee McGregor, who works with international ultra-runners,
says that while it is possible to be vegan and a good runner, it needs a
lot of careful planning. "In my clinic, many of the athletes that come
in with relative energy deficiency have become vegan," she says, adding
that the high intake of fibre more common in a vegan diet can impact the
absorption of nutrients such as iron and calcium, as well as displace
energy intake.

There are not enough long-term studies to show how vegan diets impact
athletic performance, which leaves us with a battleground of anecdotal
evidence. Some of the world's leading long-distance runners swear by the
meat-heavy diet promoted by Noakes, while others are vegan, spearheaded
by the legendary ultra-runner Scott Jurek, whose seven consecutive
victories in the most competitive ultra-marathon in the US, the Western
States 100-mile endurance run, make the case that a vegan diet doesn't
have to be incompatible with running.

For Oakes, proving this to the world is what gets her out of bed on cold
mornings. "It gives me a reason to get up and train," she says. "To show
what is possible, and to promote what I believe in."

© 2019 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All
rights reserved.
