> *Humans evolved to become one of the best running animals on the planet and he notes that “a good runner basically needs a palaeolithic body”. That means overcoming the malign effect of sitting on chairs all day and wearing shoes.*

Footnotes: How Running Makes Us Human by Vybarr Cregan-Reid – review 
====================================================================

Why running transforms us, reconnecting us with our bodies and the
natural world

[PD Smith](https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pdsmith)

Wed 28 Jun 2017 

![‘A profoundly transformative experience.’](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/d27c272c0c99cc7b80853ae44518d992f9cb826c/0_183_3000_1800/master/3000.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&usm=12&fit=max&s=79cf3eded15e4d222b40b5caba42d9c9)

‘A profoundly transformative experience.’ Photograph: Gonzalo Arroyo
Moreno/Getty Images for Ironman

[[W]{.drop-cap__inner}]{.drop-cap}hile running barefoot on Peckham Rye
in London, Cregan-Reid passed a boy who turned to his mother and asked:
“What’s that man running away from?” Although he quipped in reply “old
age!”, he realised the question was a good one and the search for an
answer inspired this book. Humans evolved to become one of the best
running animals on the planet and he notes that “a good runner basically
needs a palaeolithic body”. That means overcoming the malign effect of
sitting on chairs all day and wearing shoes. He only runs barefoot a
third of the time yet Cregan-Reid clearly rates the experience highly:
“Bare feet can help us feel what it is like to be in the world.” For
while he cites countless examples of how it is [good for our
health](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/apr/17/run-for-life-and-cake-longer-lifespan-jogging-skort){.u-underline},
ultimately Cregan-Reid sees running as a profoundly transformative
experience, reconnecting us with our bodies and with the natural world.
Overflowing with ideas from science and philosophy, rich in literary
allusions and filled with evocative descriptions of the landscapes he
has run through, this is a wonderfully subtle and ambitious book.

[•]{.bullet} *Footnotes: How Running Makes Us Human* is published by
Ebury. To order a copy for £7.64 (RRP £8.99) go to
[bookshop.theguardian.com](https://bookshop.theguardian.com/footnotes-495755.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article){.u-underline}
or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone
orders min p&p of £1.99.

© 2018 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies.
All rights reserved.
