fetched 2019-01-10

Fiction: Who Are Your Friends?
==============================

Monday 17th December, 2018

Caroline Osella

Check-in done, security over – only the formality of immigration now and
she’d be leaving India. Her phone was pinging non-stop but she couldn’t
stop to catch up on the latest baby or dog photos from the family
WhatsApp, nor to read all the ‘goodby and safe journey’ messages and
memes from Indian friends. The border guy scanned her passport, looked
at his screen, suddenly stiffened.

Asked her, sharply, “Where did you stay this trip, what were you doing?”

Her answer, trotted out down the years so often, bored her with its
blandness, but she knew the guy had to do his job. “I’ve been doing some
tourism, visiting old friends, enjoying Kerala.”

Somehow, this time, the words failed to produce a smile and a cheery
stamp, but caused the guy to drop eye contact and call over his boss.
The two of them peered at the computer screen, and she began to wonder
what the hell was on it.

Her phone kept on pinging WhatsApps and she fumbled for it in the bag,
turning it to silent. In these situations, you have to minimise all
possible sources of annoyance to the state official who has, as she well
knows, all power over you. Her stomach churned – she hadn’t technically
been doing research while on a tourist visa, but, as so often over the
past 30 years, she had been visiting old friends and of course some
interesting conversations had been held. She was aware that she’d not
been in a touristy area.

The boss’ powerful masculine presence was announced by the size of his
walkie-talkie and underwritten by the massive amount of hair growing
horizontally out from his ear-holes. He began to scroll through the
screen, while the first official questioned her.

“Where did you sleep on the night of 16th February? You were not in a
hotel. You do know that all foreigners are required to sleep in a hotel
and not in a private house?”

God, no, she hadn’t actually known that. Regulations had changed so many
times over the past 30 years, and she never read any small print on
anything – always in a hurry. She knew with foreboding that this
ignorance and corner-cutting was never an excuse in matters of police or
law.

The boss asked, “You were here only six months ago; why so many visits?”

Thanking God that her son had come with her on that trip, she responded,
easily, “My son was with me, I wanted to show him Kerala. He lived here
with me when he was small. You can see we visited Cochin, Wyanad… ”

She trailed off as the boss, pointing to the screen, added, “And
Calicut. And this time too, Calicut. Who are your friends in Calicut?
Where did you sleep on the night of February 16th? What are you doing,
roaming around and staying in people’s houses?”

She tried to focus, ignore the phone buzzing, buzzing in her bag, took a
deep slow breath and decided to try another tack. Smiling, she broke
into Malayalam.

“I’m a researcher,” she said, witnessing the familiar shock on the face
of the Malayali who hears their language spoken – albeit badly and with
unfamiliar accent. “If you look at the records, you’ll see I’ve spent
some long periods here, on research visa, doing research. For the
University of London,” she added, wishing it was Cambridge or Oxford,
for the extra clout that would bring to this post-colonial encounter.
“So, like that I got to know lots of people here, and sometime I come on
holiday and meet them and visit them. I am so sorry that I slept in my
friend’s home that night; they invited me, and I didn’t know it was
forbidden.”

The pair behind the desk laughed – or were they smirking? – at each
other, enjoying the thrilling combination of power over the
ex-coloniser, masculine power over a woman who clearly didn’t know her
place, roaming around India alone as though that were a respectable or
decent thing to do. And loving the fun of hearing this woman speak their
mother-tongue, however badly. A boring shift had certainly brightened up
with this one!

The men walked away from the desk, knowing now that she would understand
any overheard conversation and she cursed herself for outing her secret
super-power – the language thing. Her phone buzzing was like a wasp on
her leg now, biting and poking. She wondered what messages were on it
and whether anything would be incriminating if the guards insisted on
seeing it. Could they ask to see it, she wondered, and began to feel
seriously nauseous now as she realised how badly this could go, if they
decided that she’d been doing research covertly and without proper visa
and permissions.

They returned to the desk. The boss looked bored again, now.

“See,” he began in stern tone. “You’re not allowed to stay in people’s
private homes. You MUST stay in a hotel every night when you come, and
the hotel notify us of your whereabouts. You cannot simply roam around.
Where were you sleeping that night?”

Split-second decision needed here: she knew they gather police
intelligence on foreigners, that’s probably what was coming up on
screen. If she lied, she risked major trouble; if she told the truth,
perhaps her host-friend might be in trouble. No way to know how much
they know. Shit. Why had she outed herself with the language, trying to
ingratiate herself, trying to make connection, when everyone knows you
don’t try friendly connection with state officials. Why had she assumed
this would be business as usual, easy? Thank God her friend Khadeeja was
not politically active in any way, although if their intelligence was
any good they’d know that Khadeeja’s brother was active in Muslim
society. Innocent, but in this climate of Hindu nationalism, anything
can look suspicious. Even eating biryani. The border guards were, of
course, higher-caste Hindus.

Squeezing the phone against her leg, willing it to stop buzzing and
breaking her focus, realising that she was now possibly in trouble, she
adopted a humble, penitent look, thanking God just this once for her
present embodiment as middle-aged white lady – was there ever a less
suspicious identity in these days of profiling? – and said, “I stayed
with a friend, Khadeeja. Our kids are the same age and when I lived in
Calicut, we became friends.” Using another super-power – the Indian
mother thing – shameless now, desperate to be allowed to pass and get on
that plane.

The boss nodded grimly, the border guard stamped her exit visa, she
smiled a humble sweet thanks and walked – as briskly as she dare – away.

As she opened her phone to the horror of 35 WhatsApps from Mohammed, her
Kerala friend in London, she could hear the border guards calling after
her, laughing, enjoying the baiting, mocking her. Mohammed’s WhatsApps
began with the information that an immigration raid had picked him up
from the Croydon restaurant he’d been working at for the past five
years, and he was on his way to the police station. Scrolling fast, she
tracked his journey through the cells, into another van, onto a
detention centre. No lawyer, no explanation, just something irregular in
his documents somewhere. She knew they hardly needed an excuse these
days. She scrolled down fast through several messages:

“Are you there?”

“Please answer me”

“I am very scared now”

Then the last. “They have given my phone back, they are deporting me. I
cannot go back to my flat or collect any of my things. They will take me
back to Kerala tomorrow. Please do not let anyone I know hear about it –
this is very shameful for me. I will have to make a story why I left
suddenly.”

As she walked to the boarding gate, postcolonial nausea, border fury,
and the shame of privilege mixed in her heart with the powerful sorrow
that she knew she could do nothing, had no power to help Mohammed.

The Indian border guards called out to her right till she reached the
gate, mocking her and laughing between themselves.

“Who are your friends in Calicut? Who are your friends?!”

[**Exegesis** ]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

This story is based on two sets of events which I was involved in, and
the fictional aspect is that the two incidents – my visa troubles and
Mohammed’s arrest in a UK immigration
[raid](https://www.compas.ox.ac.uk/project/does-immigration-enforcement-matter-diem/){.sm-link-external},
transportation to a police station, then [detention
centre](https://ukhumanrightsblog.com/2018/03/19/immigration-detention-one-step-forward-two-steps-back-sophie-walker/){.sm-link-external},
and then onwards within a week to deportation – did not (thankfully)
take place on the same day.

I work as a social anthropologist whose fieldwork space is in Kerala,
south India. Here, we face a Delhi central state and a political climate
which has become, since the
[1990s](https://thewire.in/communalism/rss-sangh-parivar-babri-masjid){.sm-link-external},
increasingly hostile to various groups who are not high caste north
Indian Hindus. This includes
[Dalits](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-43605550){.sm-link-external},
[Muslims](https://thewire.in/rights/legitimising-mob-lynching-right-wing-rakbar-khan-alwar){.sm-link-external},
foreign researchers who are under suspicion of ‘bringing the nation into
disrepute’ and - as we all discovered from the late and
[half-hearted](https://www.outlookindia.com/website/story/please-declare-floods-in-kerala-a-national-disaster-rahul-gandhi-to-pm/315225){.sm-link-external}
response from Delhi when the recent
[floods](https://www.indiatoday.in/kerala-floods/story/kerala-floods-fishermen-turn-true-heroes-for-rescue-operations-1317414-2018-08-18){.sm-link-external}
hit - Kerala state itself, vilified from the northern Hindi belt as
‘[beef
eaters](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jIUkq6Soutg){.sm-link-external}’
and ‘Arab Gulf lovers’ who could be left to drown. Kerala is an
out-migration state, which has survived down the years thanks to foreign
[remittances](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/323665837_Estimation_of_Remittances_to_Kerala){.sm-link-external}
from workers in the Gulf. The Gulf states quickly acknowledged their
[relationship](https://eprints.soas.ac.uk/5178/1/ch9_osellas.pdf){.sm-link-external}
to Kerala and debt to its workers, and rushed to offer aid, which was
[turned
back](https://www.scmp.com/news/asia/south-asia/article/2160925/facing-us3-billion-kerala-flood-damage-india-rejects-uaes-us100){.sm-link-external}
by the Hindu nationalist central government.

This story brings together some of my recent and ongoing research
concerns with the
[personal](https://www.colmich.edu.mx/files/cea/misc/rihan_visas_jokes_and_contraband.pdf){.sm-link-external}
embodied aspects of
[borders](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.729.9886&rep=rep1&type=pdf){.sm-link-external}
and their implementation, with ways in which the fictions of
[nations](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev.anthro.32.061002.093341){.sm-link-external}
are presented, with subaltern
[belongings](https://cpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.com/voices.uchicago.edu/dist/2/115/files/2014/10/Mahler-Theoretical-and-Empirical-Contributions-Toward-a-Research-Agenda-for-Transnationalism.pdf){.sm-link-external}
beyond the nation, and with the ways in which law around migration is
formed and
[implemented](https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/e/9781315444796){.sm-link-external}.

I am being funded from 2016-2019 as part of the REALM project at
University of New York Abu Dhabi, (grant RR1-0-008). My project (titled,
‘The Paradox of the Gulf as a Space of Aspiration and Freedom: further
investigation into Indian subjects’ evaluations of the migration
experience, conducted via ethnographic life course and migration
narratives’) builds upon my [earlier
findings](https://eprints.soas.ac.uk/5175/1/koshych_5_osellas.pdf){.sm-link-external},
among migrants and retired migrants, which produced negative evaluations
of the homeland and positive ones of life in the Gulf. This was
especially the case among Dalits, Muslims and women. This has two major
analytical aspects: firstly, to think about Gulf migration as not merely
remittance-driven, but as a form of [Migration J.pdf lifestyle
migration](https://dspace.lboro.ac.uk/dspace-jspui/bitstream/2134/9142/5/Lifestyle){.sm-link-external};
and secondly, to challenge [liberal
assumptions](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/international-labor-and-working-class-history/article/unofficial-citizens-indian-entrepreneurs-and-the-stateeffect-in-dubai-united-arab-emirates/2B4F1D41E08147A38F6FCF0A995E8930){.sm-link-external}
common in anthropology, geography and political theory and thereby
permeating the sub-discipline of migration studies, which would assume
that life as a citizen in India is necessarily superior (citizenship,
democracy, free speech and free press, a common law legal system based
on UK colonial system) to life as a temporary migrant worker with no
right of long-term stay and no hope ever of citizenship, in a
non-democratic state (federation of states under hereditary tribal
sheikhs; shariah and civil law; strongly differentiated rights for
citizens and outsiders, with tightly closed citizenship based on tribal
belonging).

**Caroline Osella is a social anthropologist who has worked for 30 years
in Kerala, India and in the Gulf with Indian migrants from Kerala. Since
2018, when she left SOAS, London, she is a research associate at
[University of Sussex Global
Studies](http://www.sussex.ac.uk/global/){.sm-link-external}.**
**Caroline blogs as WoBy at <https://worthingethnographic.com>, and
about migration at <https://blogs.soas.ac.uk/osella-realm/en/>.**

### 17.12.2018

"The Sociological Review" is a trading name of The Sociological Review
Publication Ltd., a company registered in England and Wales, registered
number 09275459, registered address at Warmington Tower, Sociology
Department, Goldsmiths, University of London, Lewisham Way, London SE14
6NW, United Kingdom | The Sociological Review Foundation Limited is a
company registered in England and Wales. Company Number 09044774,
Charity number 1161961. Registered address: Warmington Tower, Sociology
Department, Goldsmiths, University of London, Lewisham Way, London SE14
6NW, United Kingdom. | Site developed by [VSC Creative
Ltd.](http://www.vsccreative.com){.sm-link-external} | Powered by
[Smartest](http://sma.rte.st){.sm-link-external} | © The Sociological
Review Publication Ltd. 2013-2019

In order to help us ensure this website provides you with a reliable
experience, we would like to place cookies on your machine to help make
this website better. This includes analytic information on website
usage. Please give us permission to do so by [clicking here to show you
understand.](#cookie-warning-dismiss){#sm-cookie-warning-dismiss}
Information on the cookies used on this site is available in our [cookie
notice](https://www.thesociologicalreview.com/cookie-notice.html).
