Mailbag with Jennifer Pharr Davis: To Become a Mom or To Adventure? {#mailbag-withjennifer-pharr-davis-to-become-a-mom-or-to-adventure .post__title}
===================================================================

Welcome to Mailbag with [Jennifer Pharr
Davis,](https://thetrek.co/jennifer-pharr-davis/) where we take hikers’
questions and pass them off to the trail legend for her wisdom and
analysis. JPD’s newest book, [The Pursuit of
Endurance](https://amzn.to/2IADicm) is available now.

**I am a woman about to turn 30, and I’m at a crossroads. I’ve just
discovered the outdoors life, and there’s still so much I want to do! I
want to hike a long trail, learn mountaineering, live in remote areas…
but as I get older I’ve also realized that I want children someday. I
know there’s still plenty of adventure to be had with kids, but I also
know that it requires some settling down, hard work, and less time for
yourself. I feel like if I have children now, I’ll resent them for
taking away my opportunity to go on big adventures. But I also worry
that if I don’t start planning for kids soon, my biological clock will
run out and I’ll be stuck childless. This has to be a challenge many
outdoors people (especially women) face. How do you decide when you’re
ready to slow down and start a family? –*Ashley S***

This past summer I was giving a talk to promote my new book, *[The
Pursuit of Endurance](https://amzn.to/2A6Sooy),* in Kalamazoo, Michigan.
After the presentation, I was stationed at the book table doing my
normal meet-and-greet, plus signing. I noticed one woman lingering at
the back of the line and when her time came to approach the table she
looked at me sheepishly and said, “I didn’t like something you said in
the talk.”

Immediately my mind backtracked to all the statements I made over the
past 45 minutes that could have been perceived as offensive. But what
the woman said next never crossed my mind.

“You said that one of the reasons you wanted to try for the AT record
before starting a family is because you knew that your body and time
would no longer be your own after having children. But I don’t think
that’s true. I mean, moms can still have adventures.”

To be clear, yes, you can absolutely you can have adventures as a mom.
But the excursions you take as a mom will be different than the journeys
you take before having children. I stand by the idea that your time and
body will not be your own once your start a family. My children are
currently five and two, and out of the past six years, I have spent four
pregnant or nursing. And I have only enjoyed a couple dozen nights of
uninterrupted sleep. I have continued to hike and backpack, but my
miles, destination, and duration on the trail have been dictated by the
needs of my children whether in utero, as a nursing infant, or as a
toddler with emotional attachment.

> I am beyond grateful that I found long-distance hiking at the age of
> 21. The early discovery provided me with nearly a decade of extreme
> and extended adventures.

Now, after six years, I am starting to reclaim much of my physical
independence and I feel able to spend longer periods of time away from
my children. But still, the psychological shift that took place through
my childbearing years come into play on every adventure. Risks that I
was willing to take before children, such as hiking through grizzly
country solo or heading out for extended adventures out of cell range
are no longer options in my mind. As a parent I am accountable and
responsible for more than just myself. While I don’t feel a need to be
in constant contact with my family, I do want to be in a position where
I can receive updates and conclude my trip if necessary.

There are moms and dads out there who are comfortable with greater risk
and more time away from their children. There are also parents who would
never dream of taking time such as the two weeks that I plan each year
for independent adventuring. It’s a scale. There’s no right. There’s no
wrong. Just remember that a person’s approach, considerations, and
adventures will intrinsically change once they become a parent.

I am beyond grateful that I found long-distance hiking at the age of 21.
The early discovery provided me with nearly a decade of extreme and
extended adventures. Trying for the record on the Appalachian was a
culmination of 10,000 miles of long-distance adventure combined with a
love of endurance and pushing my limits. I wanted to know what my body
could do on the trail so that I could move forward and embrace a
different season and pace of life. I have not felt the need or desire
for that level of adventure since starting a family.

I have friends, however, who do feel sad and resentful for having
children (planned or unplanned) at a point when it limited their career
or their adventures. On top of that, they feel guilty for feeling sad or
resentful. My heart goes out to these individuals. Moms and dads
shouldn’t feel guilty for mourning the loss of their independence.
Sometimes being honest with these emotions, being able to express them
and coming to terms with them can help individuals move forward and more
embrace their current reality.

The common thread I have observed among the men and women who have the
most adventures is not whether they chose to procreate, but based on
their capacity for planning. There are ways to maximize your adventures
before children and there are ways to incorporate adventure into you
role as a parent and your life as a family. But these endeavors all
require thoughtfulness, logistics, and care consideration when it comes
to scheduling and commitment.

Here are some tips to think about and options to consider as you start
to plan your adventures… and your family.

#### Start Having Adventures NOW

Don’t hesitate! Begin working towards your adventure goals immediately.
That might mean quitting your job and starting a thru-hike, or it could
be opening a bank account and aggressively saving for your international
travels. If you need time to train or save for an adventure, look for
ways to incorporate education, training, and mini-adventures into your
everyday life. Prioritize your dreams.

#### Protect your Plans

Plan your adventures in advance and do not let work or personal
obligation infringe on those dates. Exploration is a commitment. At the
beginning of each year, my husband and I each mark two weeks off of the
calendar for personal adventure. These weeks are sacred and safe from
most conflicts that arise. There are exceptions. Personal injury or
serious illness within the family have given us cause to shift our
dates. But new work opportunities, tight deadlines, and a two-year-old
with a UTI have all threatened those windows without success. There are
effective medicines for UTIs and there will always be exciting work
opportunities, but there is no substitute for adventure.

#### Weigh your Desires

Wanting adventure and a family as a thirty-year old woman is different
than wanting adventure and a family as a forty-year old. There might
come a time when you are forced to do some soul searching and bluntly
ask yourself what you want more and where your time is best spent. I
have a great deal of respect for the women I know who have consciously
chosen to increase their capacity for adventure and also lessen their
environmental impact by deciding not to have children.

#### Wait to Start a Family

One of the funniest phrases I’ve heard is “geriatric pregnancy.” The
humor is found in my mental image of a gray-haired, pregnant grandma
with a walking cane but the reality is that a geriatric pregnancy refers
to any woman with child over the age of 35. Medically speaking there are
increased risks when you wait to start your family. But you are never at
any age guaranteed a perfectly healthy pregnancy. And if waiting until
you are older to become a parent makes you a better caregiver then the
risk can be worth the reward.

#### Freeze Your Eggs

This might not be a viable option to everyone based on personal ethics
or financial resources, but it is a way to extend your childbearing
years and create more time for adventure.

#### Consider Adoption

Adopting a child is another incredible way to start a family later in
life and limit the environmental impact of bringing another life into
the world. And if you aren’t ready to begin a family in your 30s but
don’t want to start with an infant in your 40s, you have the ability to
adopt older children who need love and a good home just as much as a
newborn. PLUS, you will have more physical flexibility and freedom to do
the things you love by not navigating the nine-month cycle of pregnancy
along with the demands and potential complications of delivery.

#### Let Go of Expectations

The process of family planning is akin to adventure in that they both
offer circumstance out of one’s control. There is no marked trail for
starting a family. It can include unwanted or unexpected pregnancy,
infertility, miscarriage, the uncertainty of adoption applications,
depression, complications, and special needs. The trail—and
parenthood—teaches that you can’t necessarily change your environment or
current circumstances, but you can alter your outlook and response. And
you can keep going.

[![](//www.avantlink.com/gbi/10248/220479/126095/151515/image.jpg){width="300"
height="250"}](http://www.avantlink.com/click.php?tt=ml&ti=220479&pw=151515)

#### Nursing vs. Formula

Nursing is a great option. Formula is a great option. I’m not here to
advocate which is better, because I believe that different methods will
be better for different individuals. If you do chose to nurse it will
limit the type of adventure that you can have based on accessibility to
your child or a pump. However, dealing with sterilized bottles and
temperature-regulated formula can be challenging on the move. Nursing is
probably more conducive to having adventures alongside your children
while formula may be better suited for those who need or want to spend
time away from the brood.

#### Seek out Local Adventure

With or without children, it is a shame to miss out on adventures that
take place near where you live. Perhaps it’s the ever-changing covers of
outdoor magazines that make us think if we are not alone on top of a
mountain hundreds of miles away from civilization that we are not having
a true adventure, but that’s simply not the case. I might not have time
for a 400-mile continuous thru-hike, but I live next Pisgah National
Forest and its 400 miles of trail. That affords me with the opportunity
to piece together day hikes and overnights and walk every mile of trail
without ever being more than 1.5 hours away from home. Maximize the
adventures in your backyard.

#### Find a Supportive Partner

The biggest key to having successful adventures with a family is to have
a supportive partner. If you want to continue your growth through
personal exploration, it is critical to be with someone who values you,
and understands the value of adventure. It is also important to support
and encourage your partner’s personal interests and hobbies apart from
the family—even if it’s not hiking (Gasp!). If you don’t have personal
support in the form of a partner, ask for help from friends and family.
Look for someone in your circle who would enjoy being a temporary
caretaker for your children or an accountability partner for adventures.

#### Embrace the Current Season

Don’t focus on what you can’t do. Instead, focus on what you can do
right now. I have single friends who would love nothing more than to
have a family but they make the most of their independence by planning
adventures and traveling the world. I also know moms and dads who
struggle with the weight and responsibility of parenthood, but they find
ways to create small adventures with and for their children while their
dreams are on hold. There are ways to satiate the void without it
overflowing.

This fall my daughter started kindergarten and my son entered part-time
preschool. It is the first time my husband and I have had consistent
childcare for both of our children. It is strange and exhilarating to
have more freedom to work and travel and plan adventures. It is also a
relative increase compared to the personal freedom I enjoyed before
starting my family. And while my time for adventure has started to
increase and I have more ownership over my body, I still feel confident
that my time and body and adventures will never again belong solely to
me.

As a mom, I share all of it with my family regardless of whether they
are by my side or waiting for me at home. And that has made my
adventures seem a whole lot more valuable.


[![Jennifer Pharr
Davis](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b1fc7855aba33e06ab9fd75ea526c25e?s=150&d=https%3A%2F%2Fphotos.thetrek.co%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2017%2F02%2Fcustom-gravatar.png&r=r)](/author/jennifer-pharr-davis/)

[ Nov 1st : [Jennifer Pharr Davis](/author/jennifer-pharr-davis/)
]{.post__author-callout__small-info}

[Author Page](/author/jennifer-pharr-davis/)

[Jennifer Pharr Davis's Bio]{.post__author-callout__bio__title}
Jennifer Pharr Davis has amassed 14,000 trail miles, held the
Appalachian Trail supported FKT, the Long Trail unsupported FKT, and has
subsequently made a career out of her passion for the outdoors. She is
the author of multiple hiking books, most recently The Pursuit of
Endurance. She's here to answer your most pressing questions about life
on and off the trail.








[Comments]{.post__comments__title__text} [1]{.post__comments__title__number} {#comments-1 .post__comments__title}
----------------------------------------------------------------------------






    ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1c21edb2ae0f21fc332420736cfee53d?s=180&d=https%3A%2F%2Fphotos.thetrek.co%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2017%2F02%2Fcustom-gravatar.png&r=r){.avatar
    .avatar-180 .photo width="180" height="180"
    srcset="https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1c21edb2ae0f21fc332420736cfee53d?s=360&d=https%3A%2F%2Fphotos.thetrek.co%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2017%2F02%2Fcustom-gravatar.png&r=r 2x"}


    [ Scott Brotherton : Nov 2nd ]{.post__comments__comment__small-info}



    I’m a male so I’ll add my perspective, which will of course
    differ….I am an ‘old’ Dad’ my daughter arrived nearly as my 40th
    B-day present…but now, w/my kids at the ages of 13 (son) & 16, there
    is little better than sharing your love of the outdoors w/them (from
    a young age). It is actually quite nice (and makes me proud as well)
    to watch my kids set up their tents (although my daughter is now a
    hammock/tarp camper) and just take care of things themselves. it’s
    the pay off for that time you ‘lose’ or gets altered. Essentially
    you are just trading one great experience for another IMHO. And yes,
    we have discussed doing the AT as a family…before Dad gets too
    old…lol




    [Reply](https://thetrek.co/mailbag-jennifer-pharr-davis-mom-vs-adventure/?replytocom=101216#respond){.comment-reply-link}








### What Do You Think? [Cancel reply](/mailbag-jennifer-pharr-davis-mom-vs-adventure/#respond){#cancel-comment-reply-link} {#reply-title .comment-reply-title}

Name [\*]{.required}

Email [\*]{.required}

Website

Comment

[© 2018 Copyright The Trek.]{}
