See head first JQuery

# A baby

Let's pretend to be a baby. (We're not all that far anyway.) I don't like being too much time indoors. There's not much to explore and not a lot of incoming information from the outside: no wind, nor heat or cold, nor sunlight, nor rain hail or snow, nor strange unexpected movements. Yes, I can play with a lot of people: fun games, family and friends, strangers when along the street and nice soothing movements when I get into a car (no buses for me, that may feel a little unstable and dangerous at my age if I can avoid them). At home I can check my old man's library full of colors and textures, but I am only five months old: I am just learning to sit up by my own, I can't even tackle the TV set by my self or adventure crawling through the floor to inspect corners, dusty empty spaces, loose objects in useless places, plugs and even knives in the kitchen and the refrigerator. Several elements are available in a average apartment, or even in a house further away from the city.

All changes if we suddenly get out for some fresh air. The sun hits in the face and I squint my eyes even un-intendedly. Even if I can hear the noises from cars in the highway the sounds that prevail are coming from the birds. By the amount of chirps and distinct frequencies I could say that there are a good amount of different species and biodiversity: although at my age I don't know much of these concepts I still have my senses quite heightened and awake. How could I let this aside? Why would I? 

