Telling stories to help understand what sociology is about
==========================================================

Saturday 9th April, 2016

[Claudia](https://www.thesociologicalreview.com/blog/telling-stories-to-help-understand-what-sociology-is-about.html)
[Vallve](https://claudiavallve.com/)

**In the ninth part of our special section on Sociology and
Fiction, [Claudia Vallve](https://claudiavallve.com/) considers the
power of stories for making Sociology accessible.**

I love story telling. I love hiking too. This is a story about hiking
and, also, about telling stories about society.

As I said, I love hiking. And I’m fortunate to live in a region full of
mountains. From Barcelona, where I work and live, I can get to wonderful
mountains within a couple of hours ride. I’m a member of a hiking
society. We usually go hiking on weekends. We walk, talk and enjoy
climbing up and down the mountains.

One of the members of this hiking society is a lecturer at the Barcelona
University Department of Genetics and co-director of a scientific
dissemination collection, launched by the university as a means of
bringing society closer to the world of science. One day, as we walked
and talked, I told him that it was a pity that there were not many
scientific dissemination books in humanities. He has written a lot of
books to help people understand things as *why we age*, *what
transgenics are for* and *what’s the use of sex*. However there are not
many books of this kind on sociological issues. Somehow, “great”
scientists see it as something easy, simple, and not valuable. However,
writing a book that can be understood by anyone is a really difficult
task. And I can prove it. My impulsive reaction to my friend’s offer was
to write a book to explain how sociology helps us to understand society.
And I soon realized the complexity of the challenge I had embraced.

I wanted to explain sociological concepts such as social class, gender
differences, primary and secondary socialization, alienation, anomie, or
liquid society in an understandable way. I also wanted to explain what
sociology is, how sociologists work and present the different methods we
use to do our research work. The idea was that anyone with a high school
degree could read the book without difficulty. Being a book for
dissemination, the approach should be entertaining and easy to read.

After a few days looking at the white paper, and feeling in front of a
cliff, I found the solution: *stories*. I spoke of the idea with my
friend, and he proposed that I write short stories to help me introduce
the sociological concepts I wanted to present. It was a great idea.

For instance, to explain Bauman’s concept of liquid society I used this
little story:

> *James is having a coffee in front of the courts. He has just signed the
divorce from his third wife.*

> *He looks at his glass, while stirring the coffee, and remembers his
first marriage: the bride, beautiful, dressed in white and with a flower
bouquet in her hands; he, in a tight black tuxedo. They swore they would
be together for ever, for good and bad things… and after a couple of
years they had split.* *The other two marriages were civil ones, but
they also swore eternal love. And none of them lasted for long.*

> *I must be doing something wrong – thinks James – since I’m not able to
hold a relationship over five years. But he quickly changes his mind:
most of his friends are separated, and the ones who haven’t would be
better off living alone.*

> *But it’s not only marriage that doesn’t work. Work does not last long
either. And he doesn’t have enough fingers to count all the flats he has
lived in. However, nowadays changing flat is easy. You don’t even have
to move: a visit to Ikea and you have a brand new home in no time.*

> *Thinking all this he pays his coffee and heads to his ex-wife's home.
To finish things off, it’s his turn to take care of his children this
afternoon. He is not really in the mood for it. So he decides they will
eat at McDonalds, which is easy and quick. And after this, he’ll take
the children to the Apple Store. To cheer up, he will buy the new iPad
Air 2. His tablet is really old and it’s too slow, so he needs a new
one. Besides, kids love technology stores. Maybe he also buys a new
smartphone for his son, who is eleven and insists on getting a new one
because the old one is “crap”.*

Through the story of James, I introduce the concept of liquid society.
Thinking about Jame's life, we can easily understand what Bauman says
about post-modern life being a succession of new beginnings, in which we
are not worried about starting from scratch, but on closing things as
soon as we can and getting rid of what we don’t need anymore. 

To James everything is superfluous and everything changes: wives, work,
furniture, home, objects. Everything in his life is temporary. But it’s
not only work, or things, or love that is liquid. Also social
relationships have become liquid. And James is also a good example for
this. He does not even know his neighbors, but has more than 400 friends
on Facebook.  

And so on. Accompanying James we enter into the contradictions of
post-modern life. We get a glimpse of the fragile position in which we
have placed ourselves. Of consumerism and all the environmental problems
associated with the exponential growth of consumption. And we will see
how the only way out of this dead end is education, awareness and
involvment in decision making.

The book is inhabited by a handful of characters that help us understand
better how society and social relations work. A couple of girls born the
same day in the bosom of an upper class and a lower class family, a
Sociology professor that has to explain to his friends what his work is
about, an old working woman who is thrilled about being interviewed by a
young sociologist or a traditional family celebrating Christmas, with
women at the kitchen while man speak about business, are some of the
characters I have created to help me explain what sociology is, how it
works and how it can help us to better understand our complex world.

The experience writing the book has been an enriching one. Reflecting on
the stories has been helpful in enabling me to structure the chapters
and to introduce complex concepts in a simple way. Now the book is
waiting to be published. I hope it helps people from outside our little
world to understand us better. 

______

"The Sociological Review" is a trading name of The Sociological Review
Publication Ltd., a company registered in England and Wales, registered
number 09275459, registered address at Warmington Tower, Sociology
Department, Goldsmiths, University of London, Lewisham Way, London SE14
6NW, United Kingdom | The Sociological Review Foundation Limited is a
company registered in England and Wales. Company Number 09044774,
Charity number 1161961. Registered address: Warmington Tower, Sociology
Department, Goldsmiths, University of London, Lewisham Way, London SE14
6NW, United Kingdom. | Site developed by [VSC Creative
Ltd.](http://www.vsccreative.com){.sm-link-external} | Powered by
[Smartest](http://sma.rte.st){.sm-link-external} | © The Sociological
Review Publication Ltd. 2013-2017

