# always blue!

in the series Silicon Valley there is a simple chant that goes through the whole story and signals a time of fun and non serious time that is simply an addition to all the rest that is always happens in a more dedicated work life. that kind of companionship and free time to just do nonsense seems very sane. also reminds of kurt cobain s spirit to not be to excesively serious. dont even take yourself too seriously!

# so it goes

kurt vonegut s book slaughterhouse five has valuable insights into the importance and non importance of time. what it means to capture all at the same instant. in another planet, in tralfamadore, they can actually notice everything at once. so nothing is a surprise and they live with a certain calm of spirit and understanding of things just are.
a whole other situation is when things get out of control and time moves randomly and changes a persons physical presence. that is being "sick in the fourth dimension". so what would it be to be healthy in that realm?

# good and bad influences on tv in 2020

i have been attacked. by ads. this is how i got to know some interesting stuff if I recall correctly. i believe this may have been where i found ben greenfield material first. Mindvalley
note: i dont use cable nor antenna tv. rather pc, bleutooth keyboard and mouse and screen.
also: [testosterone](https://bengreenfieldfitness.com/article/biohacking-articles/how-to-biohack-your-testosterone/)

# shazam

cool that a current hero has such a huge and ancestral challenge as to oppose against the old [cardinal sins](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven_deadly_sins):

2.1	Lust  
2.2	Gluttony  
2.3	Greed  
2.4	Sloth  
2.5	Wrath  
2.6	Envy  
2.7	Pride  

what are the gained powers? that of the gods!

Carry my name, and with it, you carry all my powers.
The wisdom of Solomon,
the strength of Hercules,
the stamina of Atlas,
the power of Zeus,
the courage of Achilles,
and the speed of Mercury.


