(posted to the IUS-L list on 4/25/96 by Ed Furtaw, in response to a new
list member's bio)

Welcome to the internet society ultra list (ius-l) Rob.

I noticed in your bio that you run about 20 miles per week (mpw).  That
makes you another one of us recreational, low-training-mileage runners.
There are others of us on this list who claim to run weekly averages of
6.5 to 30 mpw.  This defies the previously common understanding among most
ultrarunners that 50 miles per week or more was necessary to be able to
complete ultras.  Fortunately for several of us, that myth has been
disproved, and it is now recognized that there are at least a few of us
who can do up to several ultras a year on training bases under 30 mpw.
So, we'll be watching for results from you to see if we have a new member
to the low-mileage ultrarunner coalition.

As for some suggestions for "an ultra training schedule that includes,
running, beer drinking, and maybe some golf", here are several suggestions
(from a 25 mpw runner who has completed over 50 ultras).

1. Specificity of training.  Pick an ultra event that you intend to run,
and tailor your training as much as possible to simulate the race
conditions (surface type, elevation, elevation change, temperature, etc.).
Learn to mentally visualize in training the ultra that you plan to run.
Drink beer after your training runs as a way of repleting liquid and
carbohydrates.  But also drink something that has lots of electrolytes to
replenish those, esp. sodium.

2. Long training runs.  Do at least half of your weekly mileage in one
long training run.  At least one other runner on this list runs less than
30 mpw, with the great majority of it in a long once-per-week run.  Drink
beer after these long training runs as a way of repleting liquid and
carbohydrates.

3. Cross-training.  Do other endurance-type activities, such as long hikes
or golf.  Golf is ideal especially if you aren't very good; that way you
will get in some extra mileage walking in the woods looking for your
balls.  Make sure you do not ride a golf cart.  Preferably you should
carry your own clubs in a heavy bag to which additional weight has been
added for the weight training effect.  Weight training is very beneficial
to us low-mileage types.

4. Vary weekly mileage.  Start at least 12 weeks before the intended ultra
and gradually increase mileage to a level that is about 20%-50% higher
than your average mpw.  For example, if your annual average is 20 mpw, try
to build up to at least 25 mpw during your training before the ultra.

5. Peak and taper.  Peak your weekly mileage two or three weeks before the
ultra.  Then taper your mileage down for the last 2-3 weeks.  You will
feel rested and ready for action on race morning.

6. Carbo-load before the ultra.  Starting five days before the ultra, eat
a high carbohydrate diet which includes plenty of beer.  But on the very
day before the ultra, eat a more normal diet to help ensure that your
bowels will be working properly the day of the race.

7. During the race: the most important factor is to have fun and enjoy
what you are doing.  Other important factors are pace, drinking, and
calorie intake, and (if it is a trail race) navigation.

8. Pace. Run at as close to a constant pace as you can during the event.
This means going out at the start much slower than you will want to.

9. Drinking. Drink enough fluid to urinate every couple of hours or so.
Include electrolytes, especially sodium, in your drinks.  Practice
drinking during training the types of liquids that you will be drinking
during the race.  Do not drink beer during the race; wait until
afterwards.

10. Calories. Consume enough calories during the run to supply at least
the majority of your caloric requirements.  This means ingesting at least
about 300 Calories per hour during the run.  The longer the run, the
greater the percent of your caloric requirements you should ingest during
the run.

11. Navigation. If it's a trail race, carry a map (preferably topographic)
and course description (preferably with elevation profile) and compass.
Try to have run on all parts of the course in advance, or at least
memorize everything you can about it from descriptions from those who are
familiar with the course.  If you get lost, the best general rule is to go
back the way you came until you know where you are on the course.

12. Post-race. After the race, walk around smiling and drinking a few
beers for a while, socializing with the other runners and savoring your
accomplishment.  Do not immediately stop and sit or lie down or you will
get stiff muscles and joints.  An easy run of 1-3 miles on each of the
next few days will help speed repair your recovery.

13. Post your experiences.  As soon as possible after the race, be sure to
write an e-mail story about your experiences and post it to this list.  We
all need to learn from each other as much as possible.

Good luck!

Frozen Ed
furtaw@hrc.nevada.edu
------------------------------------------------------

(posted to the IUS-L list on 4/25/96 by Jeff Wold, in response to Ed's
posting)

14.  Ask ultra veterans for advice.  Subscribe to email lists, surf the
web, train with em, subscribe to UltraRunner magazine.

