“Are You The Fat Lady Who Works Here?”
======================================

[By [Fat Girl
Running](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/author/mvalerio)]{} | Sep.
27, 2017

![](http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/JoannTaylor_compressor.jpg){.wp-image-81119
width="491" height="299" sizes="(max-width: 491px) 100vw, 491px"
srcset="http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/JoannTaylor_compressor.jpg 820w, http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/JoannTaylor_compressor-320x195.jpg 320w, http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/JoannTaylor_compressor-768x468.jpg 768w, http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/JoannTaylor_compressor-689x420.jpg 689w, http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/JoannTaylor_compressor-785x479.jpg 785w"}
Mirna’s mother, Joann Taylor, at the Women’s Running September 2017
cover photoshoot location.

Becoming A Recognized Runner
----------------------------

A few days ago as I was chatting with my assistant coaches after
cross-country practice, a couple in a car came up the driveway in front
of the dorm where we were standing. It had been a long day and were
about to sign off when the couple stopped just ahead and stared at us. I
approached the car and asked, “Can I help you?”

Strangers don’t normally drive this far onto campus unless….they’re
looking for the “fat lady that works here.”

“Um, what?” I responded, confused.

With a deep southern lilt, the man said, “We’re looking for the fat
lady. The one who works here.”

I looked back at my colleagues, confused and, admittedly, a bit stunned.

“What does she do here? What’s her job?” I asked.

“She runs!” he exclaimed.

I stuck my head in the car. “Are you looking for *me*?”

“Yes! We’ve been trying to meet you for two years already. From the time
that magazine article came out, we’ve been looking for you. Every time
we drive past the school to get to our cabin we come up to see if we
could meet you but you’re so hard to find! I wanted to see if maybe I
could go for a run with you,” the man said.

**Related: [Why You Should Be Reading The Blog “Fat Girl
Running”](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2016/02/fat-girl-running/why-you-should-be-reading-the-blog-fat-girl-running_55032#HTMhmMRZHPXB3kx8.97)**

Both he and his wife got out of the car and hugged me. They were so
happy to finally meet me and said that anytime I was down in Alabama,
they’d be happy to host me. We chatted for a little while longer, and
then they departed, delighted to have finally met me.

Slight creepiness aside, this exchange only served to remind me that
people are always watching, observing and learning from you. And maybe,
just maybe, admiring you from afar. In fact, I wrote a post on my blog a
couple of years ago when I talked about a woman who, unbeknownst to me,
had been counting my loops around a lake trail. As I ran by, she asked,
“How many?” I responded, “Four!” thinking she was referring to how many
loops I was planning on doing. “You’re only at three!” she said and
continued on her walk.

From my local mail-carrier to folks at races and in airports—I hear
things like:

“I see you didn’t run today. You all right?”

“Are you
**[Fatgirlrunning](http://fatgirlrunning-fatrunner.blogspot.com)**?!?”

“You’re that blogger, right?”

“Are you, um, the mirnavator?”

“Did I see you on that Tough Mudder show on TV?”

“OMG it’s MIRNA!!!”

“I just read your book!!!”

Wow, folks! Never in my life did I imagine that anyone besides friends
and family would ever walk up to me in an airport and know and/or care
who I was.

I also never imagined that I’d see the image of myself on the cover of a
*running* magazine at that same airport and then have hundreds and
hundreds of people reach out to share their own stories with me on
social media and email.

From the shy ninth grader who ran a mile and decided to join the field
hockey team because it looked easier than soccer (it wasn’t!) to the
mom, educator, wife and runner I am today—I consider myself fortunate
and blessed.

I get to spread the joy of doing what I absolutely love to do on a daily
basis, and I have huge platform on which to do so. I get to write about
stuff I care about. I get to travel to amazing places, participate in
incredible events and be part of a community that I’ve loved since that
first painful mile on the field hockey field.

**Related: [Take A Peek At Our September Issue, Featuring Mirna
Valerio!](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2017/08/photos/sneak-peek-great-outdoors-issue_79566#XHpBe3Fv3s79PYZ1.97)**

Some wonder if I ever feel pressured to be a role model. My answer is
this:

This summer, my mother accompanied me to my *Women’s Running* cover
shoot, in a state park in Upstate New York. There was a hill—a mountain
really—that we were to climb so that James Farrell, the fabulous
photographer, could get the awesome shot that he did on the top,
complete with a sublime vista in the background. My mother, who has for
years suffered from various health issues, looked up at the long hill we
had to hike up, took a deep breath and started up the steep incline. It
took her a while to do so, but she made it to the top.

Being a role model is paying it forward. I choose to do this by shifting
my focus from what is not possible to what is, and I hope that that is
the energy and spirit I exude.

I look at my mom, and I see that *she* persevered in climbing many
metaphorical mountains, of her own volition and strength, just so that
she could witness vast and uninterrupted beauty from the top. On this
day, she accomplished something she had never done before. This woman
has always been *my* role model, and I’ve always try to pay it forward
by being hers.

If folks are encouraged by what I do; if they can see a bit of
themselves in me; if they feel inspired to put their running shoes or
hiking boots on or try yoga, or attempt a class at the gym they’ve
always been intimidated by—then I’m going to keep doing what I do. I
will continue to have high expectations for myself. I will continue to
be out on the trails and on the road, at the gym lifting heavy, in the
pool swimming laps in a figure-hugging bathing suit, or simply out in
the world sharing my enthusiasm for movement, authenticity and for life.

I thank my beloved running community for allowing me this.

**Related:**

**[A Simple Reminder To Focus On Your Own Running
Journey](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2016/04/fat-girl-running/reminder-to-focus-on-own-journey_57591#Rcab2mtUUiogYyuF.97)**

**[I’m A Serious Runner–Are
You?](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2017/06/fat-girl-running/fat-girl-running-serious-runner_76124#8eptmPfwLbzwHuaa.97)**

<div class="advert__wrap">

<div id="div_728_90_inarticle">

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="related-posts-container">

Recommended
-----------

-   [](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2017/10/fat-girl-running/mirna-book-excited-ultrarunner-thoughts_81333)
    <div class="inner-post-content">

    [Book Excerpt: The Anxious, Excited Thoughts Of An Ultrarunner](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2017/10/fat-girl-running/mirna-book-excited-ultrarunner-thoughts_81333 "Book Excerpt: The Anxious, Excited Thoughts Of An Ultrarunner")
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    [ By [Fat Girl
    Running](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/author/mvalerio)]{.author}   [October
    5 2017]{.date}

    Mirna "The Mirnavator" Valerio shares an excerpt from her first
    book.
    ![arrow](http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/themes/wrs_mashup/images/arrow-more.png){.arrow-more}

    </div>

-   <div id="div_fluid_recommended_roll">

    </div>

-   [](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2017/10/fat-girl-running/nature-trail-runner-mirna-valerio_81202)
    <div class="inner-post-content">

    [Mirna Valerio On Why Nature Remains A Huge Influence On Her Life](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2017/10/fat-girl-running/nature-trail-runner-mirna-valerio_81202 "Mirna Valerio On Why Nature Remains A Huge Influence On Her Life")
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    [ By [Fat Girl
    Running](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/author/mvalerio)]{.author}   [October
    2 2017]{.date}

    Our September cover runner, Mirna Valerio, shares how nature
    inspires every aspect of her
    life.![arrow](http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/themes/wrs_mashup/images/arrow-more.png){.arrow-more}

    </div>

-   [](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2017/07/inspiration/worst-case-scenarios-running_78401)
    <div class="inner-post-content">

    [How To Overcome Your Own Worst Case Scenarios](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2017/07/inspiration/worst-case-scenarios-running_78401 "How To Overcome Your Own Worst Case Scenarios")
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    [ By [Fat Girl
    Running](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/author/mvalerio)]{.author}   [July
    31 2017]{.date}

    Worst case scenarios are possible to
    beat.![arrow](http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/themes/wrs_mashup/images/arrow-more.png){.arrow-more}

    </div>

-   [](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2017/07/inspiration/guide-becoming-change-yourself_78394)
    <div class="inner-post-content">

    [How To Be The Change You Want To See In Yourself](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2017/07/inspiration/guide-becoming-change-yourself_78394 "How To Be The Change You Want To See In Yourself")
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    [ By [Fat Girl
    Running](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/author/mvalerio)]{.author}   [July
    27 2017]{.date}

    Mirna Valerio, future author of her own book, shares that there's no
    secret to getting brave. You just do
    it.![arrow](http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/themes/wrs_mashup/images/arrow-more.png){.arrow-more}

    </div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="sidebar" class="clearfix">

<div class="section advert">

<div id="div_300_600_side_top">

</div>

</div>

<div class="section advert">

<div id="div_300_250_side_middle">

</div>

</div>

<div class="widget-1 widget-odd widget hot-stories">

<div id="hot-stories">

-   [Popular Articles](#ga)

<div class="tab_container">

<div id="ga" class="tab_content">

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="widget">

<div class="monthly-issue">

[![](http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/WR3.jpg)](https://ssl.palmcoastd.com/23803/apps/PRINT?ikey=I**PRT)

</div>

</div>

<div class="section advert">

<div id="div_300_250_side_bottom">

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="main main__aftersidebar clearfix">

<div id="author-meta">

![Fat Girl
Running](http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/themes/wrs_mashup/images/authors/76.jpg)
Fat Girl Running
----------------

My name is Mirna Valerio, aka @TheMirnavator. I am a native of Brooklyn
and current resident of northeast Georgia. I'm a Spanish teacher,
diversity educator, cross-country coach, marathoner, ultrarunner and
blogger, writing about all things running and living life to its fullest
while being a larger gal on my blog,
[](http://fatgirlrunning-fatrunner.blogspot.com/)Fatgirlrunning. I have
a son who is 12 and a hubby who travels a lot, mostly in West Africa. I
try to live by example. We only have one body and one life. We must love
our bodies and ultimately our entire selves in order to be whole people,
in order to live our lives to the fullest. The road to self-acceptance
and self-love is a long one, and one that requires a commitment to
loving yourself (and spreading that love to others) no matter how you
perceive yourself that moment, day, or year. Get out there and be. And
run all the roads and trails.

-   [All articles by Fat Girl
    Running](http://womensrunning.competitor.com/author/mvalerio "Read more by Fat Girl Running")

</div>

</div>

[![](http://womensrunning-gy3ykgdmyg8v.stackpathdns.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/womens-running-newsletter-logo.jpg)](/)
-   [](https://twitter.com/womensrunning "Follow us on Twitter"){.social-subscribe-link
    .icon-twitter}
-   [](https://facebook.com/womensrunning "Like us on Facebook"){.social-subscribe-link
    .icon-facebook}
-   [](https://pinterest.com/womensrunning "Follow us on Pinterest"){.social-subscribe-link
    .icon-pinterest}
-   [](http://instagram.com/womensrunningmagazine "Follow us on Instagram"){.social-subscribe-link
    .icon-instagram}

© 2018 Pocket Outdoor Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved\
[Privacy Policy](https://pocketoutdoormedia.com/privacy-policy/) |
[Contact Us](/contact)

</div>

</div>

<div id="fb-root">

</div>

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=9728917&cv=2.0&cj=1)
