Ultra
=====

### Is it possible to be fat *and* fit? Healthy and happy as well as heavy? At 250 pounds, distance runner Mirna Valerio provides an inspiring example.

By John Brant [From the August 2015 issue]

![](https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/ultra-cover.jpg){.full-width-img}
Mirna Valerio in Black Rock Mountain State Park in Mountain City,
Georgia, for an early morning trail run. [/ Photographs by Bryan
Meltz]{.credit}

[“P]{.drop-cap}[eople always say to me,]{.initial-cap} ‘Anyone who runs
as much as you do deserves to be skinny.’ Of course, what they’re really
saying: ‘If you do all this running, why are you still so fat?’ ”

Mirna Valerio climbs out of her car at Black Rock Lake. It’s a shining
afternoon in early April in the high country of northeastern Georgia,
along the eastern reach of the Appalachian Mountains. The serviceberry
trees are budding on the hogback hills, but the oak trees and other
hardwoods remain bare.

![](https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/spreads-ultra.jpg){.responsive-img}
How the feature appeared in the August 2015 issue.

Early that morning, before dawn, Valerio had led a three-mile group run
around the campus of Rabun Gap-Na-coochee School in the nearby town of
Rabun Gap, where she serves as Spanish teacher, choir director, and head
coach of the cross-country team. She’s about to start her second run of
the day.

“Or people think, *She claims to follow a healthy diet, but I bet she
goes home every night and eats a gallon of ice cream.*”

Moving toward the fishing platform where she always begins her Black
Rock runs, Valerio pulls out her smartphone. “But you know what bothers
me the most? People look at me and think, *Big as this girl is, how can
she possibly enjoy her sport? She says she loves to run, but she’s
really just punishing herself.*”

Valerio’s voice—bright, plangent, and Juilliard-trained—rouses a
middle-aged man who’s been dozing on a sunny bench on the fishing deck.
He looks at Valerio—a 39-year-old, 5-foot-7, 250-pound African-American
dressed in a ball cap, fitness top, knee-length running tights, and
training shoes—and does a cartoon-grade double take. Valerio blasts him
with a big smile and a “Good afternoon, sir!”

And then, turning, she extends her arm for a ritual selfie. Every run,
every race, every traverse of a mountain trail, every gym workout,
Valerio begins by taking a photo. “To prove that I was out here,” she
explains. “To document the fact that I achieved something today.”

![](https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/ultra-selfie-grid.jpg){.full-width-img}
A collage of motivation. [/ Photographs courtesy of Mirna
Valerio]{.credit}

Later, she will post the photos on her Facebook page and her blog, *Fat
Girl Running*, in which she both writes of the joys of the running life
and thoughtfully, humorously, and sometimes angrily rebuts her doubters,
who can’t believe that a self-described fat person might discover—or
deserve—this kind of joy. No pun intended, her blog has earned a
widening audience and influence.

“Over the last 40 years, the collective BMI (body mass index) of the
American public has shot up dramatically, with catastrophic
consequences,” says David Ludwig, M.D., Ph.D., founder and director of
the New Balance Foundation Obesity Prevention Center at Boston
Children’s Hospital. “We understandably spotlight the biggest losers,
the people who drop 100 pounds and turn their lives around. But there
are countless others who, despite exercising and following a
high-quality diet, can only whittle their BMI to a certain point. They
need to learn to live healthfully with the disease of obesity, rather
than make themselves miserable trying to ‘cure’ themselves of it.”

With a BMI of approximately 39.2, more than nine points above the
National Institutes of Health-established line defining obesity,
Valerio, a marathoner, ultramarathoner, and trail runner, has emerged as
a role model for this group; a living argument that it’s possible to be
both fit and fat. “I’m pretty much in love with my body,” she writes in
her blog. “Sometimes I get disappointed or angry with it, but like any
long-term, committed relationship, it usually comes right back to love
and respect.”

</div>

<div class="body_ad site-wrapper"
style="background-image: url(https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/brooks-2220x1480-v2.jpg)"
onclick="window.location.href='https://bs.serving-sys.com/BurstingPipe/adServer.bs?cn=tf&amp;c=20&amp;mc=click&amp;pli=16573930&amp;PluID=0&amp;ord=[timestamp]';">

[![](https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/brooks-2220x1480-v2.jpg){.responsive-img
.hidden-img}](https://bs.serving-sys.com/BurstingPipe/adServer.bs?cn=tf&c=20&mc=click&pli=16573930&PluID=0&ord=%5Btimestamp%5D)

</div>

![pixel](https://bs.serving-sys.com/BurstingPipe/adServer.bs?cn=tf&c=19&mc=imp&pli=16573930&PluID=0&ord=%5Btimestamp%5D&rtu=-1)
<div class="article row">

“Mirna is proud of who she is and what she’s achieved,” says Craig
Lloyd, chief operating officer of TrailAndUltraRunning.com, an online
publication that posts Valerio’s work as a contributing writer. “She
doesn’t want to cure herself of anything.”

By making peace with her obesity—or, more accurately, by fighting her
disease to a kind of enduring, vigorously active truce—Valerio draws
kudos from a formerly skeptical medical community. As recently as a few
years ago, the jury was still out on the fit and fat controversy. A
highly publicized 2008 study, for instance, found that compared with
normal-weight active women, the risk of developing heart disease was 54
percent higher in overweight active women and 87 percent higher in obese
active women. In effect, the study seemed to suggest, you really can’t
live healthfully with obesity; being fit and being fat truly were
mutually exclusive.

Since then, however, a number of studies have been published reaching a
somewhat different conclusion. “The scientific evidence has become quite
powerful to suggest that a healthful lifestyle dramatically mitigates
the risks associated with mild levels of obesity,” says Yoni Freedhoff,
M.D., author of *The Diet Fix* and a professor at the University of
Ottawa’s Faculty of Medicine in Canada. “Scales don’t measure the
presence or absence of health. A woman with obesity running marathons
makes a superb role model.”

However, fit and fat runners such as Valerio still have their
nonscientific detractors, whose criticism, while most often tacit and
unintentional, still cuts deep: the running-shop clerk who laughs when
she tells him she will be running every day, and media outlets
(including *Runner’s World*) that have traditionally sent an implicit
but powerful message that the sport belongs to the slender, or to those
who strive to be.

“I know how hard it is for some people to accept me,” Valerio says.
“Serious running and being seriously fat just don’t go together in
people’s minds. If I didn’t run, I wouldn’t draw notice. I’d just be one
more obese black woman. And if I were thin, I’d just be one more number
at the starting line. But I run a lot, and I’m still fat. Some people
can’t get their heads around that. They don’t think I’m for real, that
I’ve earned the right to call myself a runner. They don’t say it out
loud; you learn to read it in their eyes.”

</div>

<div class="site-wrapper"
style="background-image: url('https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/ultra-state-park.jpg')">

![](https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/ultra-state-park.jpg){.responsive-img
.hidden-img}

</div>

<div class="align-center hero">

Running in Black Rock Mountain State Park. [/ Photograph by Bryan
Meltz]{.credit}

</div>

<div class="article row">

[V]{.drop-cap}[alerio settles]{.initial-cap} in to the
three-quarter-mile-long trail along the lakeshore. She runs about 25
miles a week if she’s not training for a race, 35 if she’s pointing
toward an event, with the bulk of the mileage logged on a long weekend
run. Right now she’s in a higher-mileage phase, preparing for a 50K
trail race in Georgia at the end of the month.

Valerio runs at about an 11-to 13-minute-mile pace, roughly the same
rate at which Terry Fox ran across Canada on one good leg and one
prosthetic leg in 1980. She takes walking breaks, but they’re neither
extended nor frequent; unlike many runners following a structured
walk-run system, she doesn’t cling to her chances for rest. In fact, the
breaks grow shorter as the miles accrue. “Mirna outdoes almost everyone
on campus,” says her friend, colleague, and training partner Rebecca
Smith. “The farther she runs, the stronger she gets.”

Also similar to Terry Fox, there’s nothing elegant about Valerio’s
sprawling, swivel-hipped gait. Coaches would tell her that she wastes
energy by holding her arms too high and rapidly swinging them across the
meridian of her chest. But the style works for Valerio, appearing to
serve as corrective balance for the ponderous progress of her lower
body, distinguished by barrel-like thighs and a heavy scoop of belly.

Her determined stride has carried Valerio over six marathons, two trail
ultramarathons, and scores of shorter road races. Her marathon PR is
6:13, but she doesn’t judge success by the clock. “I almost never finish
last,” she says.

Near the end of her first loop around the lake, Valerio encounters a
hiker, a middle-aged woman moving in the opposite direction. The woman,
astonished, stops in her tracks. “Beautiful day for a walk!” Valerio
says with a smile.

Then she runs on, her smile fading. “The reaction from that woman back
there—it’s not just that I’m fat.”

Valerio explains that, unlike more well-known parts of the South, the
mountains of northern Georgia were unsuited for cotton plantations or
other large farms and thus accumulated few black slaves and their
descendants. Today, Rabun County has a small Hispanic population but
only a handful of African-Americans. “As far as I know,” Valerio says,
“there are very few black families that live in the county.”

White people around the nearby town of Dillard, a center for tourism and
the arts, have proved welcoming, she says. But the attitudes along the
impoverished, meth-ridden back roads sometimes reflect a darker past.
“Rumor has it that one of Georgia’s last active Klan chapters is based
in the next town over,” she says, adding that parts of the movie
*Deliverance*, the 1970s classic depicting chilling scenes of backwoods
violence, were filmed in Rabun Gap.

“One Saturday morning I was out for a long run on the road by my house,”
Valerio recalls. “It’s a great place to run, except for the dogs. I
always carry a carved walking stick on that route.”

The scene seems all too easy to imagine: a 250-pound black woman,
running alone down an isolated road in *Deliverance* country, carrying a
big stick.

“I’m running along and a police cruiser pulls up beside me,” she
continues. “The deputy looks at me, but he doesn’t say anything. We go
on like that for maybe a minute, but it felt like an hour. Finally, he
just eased away.”

After her run, relaxing at the fishing platform, Valerio engages the man
and the female hiker, who are a couple. They’re visiting the lake with
their son, who appears to be around 20. “Did you really run all the way
around the lake?” the father asks. It’s the type of ingenuously
condescending question that Valerio hears regularly.

“Yes, sir,” she says. “I’m training for a race.”

“What kind of race?”

“A 50-kilometer trail run.” The father gives a blank look. “That’s about
31 miles,” Valerio adds.

The man gapes, then recovers. “Say, maybe you know Sean, my nephew? He
runs all those crazy races.”

The Georgia trail-running community is small and tightly knit; Valerio
says she has run often in Sean Blanton’s events. Blanton is a prominent
trail runner from Atlanta. The man is delighted. “Hey, this lady knows
Sean!” he says to his wife.

Valerio talks about some of her recent races. The son listens with a
wistful look; his mother explains that he was a good high-school
cross-country runner but in recent years has drifted away from the
sport. Valerio locks in on the boy—she is a fierce proselytizer, as the
community has discovered.

<div class="align-left">

![](https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/ultra-students-selfie.jpg){.responsive-img}
Valerio snaps a ritual selfie with a group of her students before a run.
[/ Photograph by Bryan Meltz]{.credit}

</div>

“Mirna is the reason I started running again,” says Rebecca Smith. “My
parents are runners and tried to get me into it. But it never quite
worked for me. I always had an injury or a shoe issue or some other
problem. Then I got to know Mirna, who you just can’t say no to. She’s
also extremely knowledgeable on the practical aspects of the sport. Now
I’m a regular in the early morning group.”

Valerio also spreads the gospel to her students. Kids who are late or
don’t show up for cross-country practice have to run with her early
morning group on campus. “Ms. Valerio is the most popular, energetic
teacher on campus,” says James Maxwell Trammell, a rising senior at
Rabun Gap, co-captain of the cross-country team, and the president of
the student diversity club that Valerio started. “In terms of running,
she projects an aura of inclusiveness: No matter who you are or what you
look like, you have a place in this free, open sport.”

Now, at the lake, Valerio invites the boy out to a morning run at the
Rabun Gap track. He nods evasively. “No, I mean it,” Valerio says,
looking the boy in the eye. “Come run with us. We’ll be out there
tomorrow morning.”

The parents glow from the attention bestowed on their son. “Where are
you from, honey?” the father asks.

“Brooklyn,” Valerio replies.

“Brooklyn! How come you don’t sound like it?”

Valerio gives another smile. “It’s a long story,” she says.

</div>

<div class="article row">

[W]{.drop-cap}[hen Mirna Valerio tells]{.initial-cap} her friends that
she was raised in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn, bordering the
Ridgewood neighborhood, they imagine poverty, drugs, gangs, violence,
and stark gray housing projects; they envision absent fathers, single
mothers on public assistance, children locked away in apartments to
avoid the danger of the streets, and type 2 diabetes scourging the
community worse than handguns or heroin. Valerio knew this world as she
was growing up, but there were grace notes, too: Love and grit instilled
a strength in her family and propelled Valerio on her extraordinary
trajectory.

Her mother was a strong matriarch who insisted on sitting down to a
family dinner every night. Homework time was strictly enforced. Although
Valerio’s biological father, a Honduran merchant seaman, was often
absent, off on ships around the world, he communicated by long,
detailed, carefully typewritten letters. Her stepfather, who worked in a
hospital laundry, brought home books he acquired at the hospital or from
catalogs—odd tomes that no one else wanted, including obscure medical
textbooks. There was church all day Sunday, as part of a Pentecostal
congregation with a caring, intelligent pastor.

Valerio loved to read. “The family would tease her, call her a
bookworm,” recalls her younger sister, Natasha Taylor. Valerio wanted to
be a gastroenterologist because of one of the medical books her
stepfather brought home, and because she wanted to help her family with
their health problems. Her mother was obese, diabetic, and hypertensive.
Valerio and her three siblings were likely headed down the same path.

“In second grade I remember being very thin,” Valerio says. “In third
grade I noticed my legs getting big. By the time I was 12 or 13, I was
big all over.”

However, she wasn’t generally teased about her size. “Nobody gave us a
hard time,” says Taylor, who at age 30 continues to deal with
obesity-related health problems. “Our parents shielded us from the worst
stuff in Bushwick, and everybody on our block was like family.”

Perhaps the sisters were spared ridicule because obesity is so common
among African-American females. According to CDC statistics, 57.6
percent of black women age 20 and over are obese (with a BMI of 30 or
above), and almost 82 percent are overweight (defined by the NIH as
having a BMI ranging from 25 to 29.9) or obese. On the infrequent
occasions when she was hassled—in seventh grade, she recalls, one boy
called her a “fat bitch”—Valerio found solace in her books and her
journal.

“It might be hard to believe now, but I was extremely shy as a young
girl,” she says. “I couldn’t look people in the eye.”

School formed another refuge. From Head Start forward, Valerio followed
the talented-and-gifted track. In middle school, she was selected for
the “Prep 9” program, which prepared gifted disadvantaged students for
entrance into elite private boarding schools such as Exeter and Andover.
Valerio excelled in academics but remained shy and insecure. As ninth
grade approached, teachers steered her to the Masters School, an
all-girls 5-12 boarding academy in Westchester County, New York.

“From the moment I stepped on campus, I felt comfortable,” Valerio says
of the school, which took pride in nurturing girls from all over the
world; for instance, the attorney Michelle Roberts, a native of a Bronx
housing project who was recently named head of the National Basketball
Players Association, graduated from Masters. “There were a lot of smart
kids at the school, and being in a boarding school helped me to grow.”

On her first day at school, Valerio decided to join the field hockey
team. “I had never heard of it, but it looked interesting,” she says.
For all her bulk and shyness, Valerio felt at home in her body. Unlike
many overweight kids, she hadn’t learned to hate herself.
(Interestingly, cultural and racial factors seem to play a key role in
the complex interplay of body image and self-esteem; in a 2012 survey
commissioned by the Kaiser Family Foundation in partnership with The
Washington Post, 66 percent of overweight black women reported feelings
of high self-esteem, compared to just 41 percent of thin or
average-sized white women.) “I never had PE at middle school,” Valerio
says. “I didn’t have the money to join leagues or organized sports, but
I knew what it was to play.”

The first task was to run five laps around the field. Valerio and
another unathletic scholarship student, Kristina Calbo from the Bronx,
decided to give it a try. They started the death march around the field
while Valerio’s mother, by turns proud and horrified, watched through a
plate glass window up in the dining hall. Valerio might easily have quit
after one heaving, lurching, agonized lap. She could have honorably
taken the out of being a fat girl, and retreated permanently from
physical challenges. Instead, she and Calbo struggled but kept running.
“After the laps we had a two-hour practice,” Valerio says. “The next day
I was so sore I couldn’t move, but I was hooked.”

She loved being part of a team, and the absorption and pulse of the
game. She learned to tolerate, and eventually enjoy, running the
pre-practice laps. For extra training, Valerio and Calbo started rising
at dawn to run a mile or two around the dark leafy campus.

While making herself into an athlete, Valerio spontaneously blossomed as
a singer. Her mother and sister sang R&B around the apartment, and
Valerio had taught herself to play piano by ear and sometimes sang
gospel with her church choir, but she’d never had formal musical
training, aside from basic classes at school. Two minutes into Valerio’s
audition for the Masters School Glee Club, the director told her to
stop. “‘In 25 years of teaching, I have never heard a soprano voice like
that,’ ” Valerio remembers the director saying.

<div class="align-left">

![](https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/ultra-old-photos.jpg){.responsive-img}
Clockwise from top left: third grade; a Juilliard Pre-College recital;
Oberlin graduation; in high school. [/ Photographs courtesy of Mirna
Valerio]{.credit}

</div>

Members of the school music department gave the girl free lessons. She
forged an identity as the vocalist on campus. “Mirna was an incredible
talent and even more amazing person,” recalls Nancy Theeman, who became
Valerio’s music teacher during her second year at the school. “Mirna
wasn’t into singing for the attention and glory. There’s this dense
textbook that every music student gets assigned—*A History of Western
Music*—but few actually read. Well, Mirna took the book home over winter
vacation and read it for pleasure.”

Valerio’s talent and discipline were such that one of her teachers
arranged for the girl to audition for the Juilliard Pre-College Division
program, which prepares elementary through high-school performers for
entrance into the famous music academy in New York City and other
conservatories around the country. “The audition was insanely
competitive,” Valerio recalls. “Students traveled in from D.C.,
Baltimore, and Florida to try out.” Valerio nailed the audition and
enrolled in the program.

She attended Masters during the week, excelling academically,
demonstrating a particular gift for languages. She played field hockey
and lacrosse and ran in the mornings with Calbo, then on weekends rode
the train and subway two hours to Manhattan’s Upper West Side to study
at The Juilliard School, perhaps the foremost performing arts
conservatory in the world.

Throughout her high-school years, Valerio says, she was unfazed by
weight and body-image concerns. “My hockey and lacrosse coaches were
unfailingly positive,” she says. “They had to improvise to find uniforms
big enough to fit me, but they never said a word about my weight. They
just expected me to do my workouts and eat sensibly. If I did that, my
weight would take care of itself, which is pretty much the rule I live
by today. I didn’t think much about dating or boys. I was busy and
happy, and I didn’t define myself by my physical appearance.”

Graduation approached, and Valerio faced a difficult choice. “Mirna had
the talent to pursue a career in opera,” says Theeman. “The question
was, did she have that total single-mindedness that you need to make it
as a professional performing artist? She was so bright and
inquisitive—by this time she was fluent in Spanish. She didn’t want to
limit herself to one narrow calling.”

Valerio puts her choice in plainer terms. “Sopranos have the reputation
for not being the brightest bulbs,” she says. “I had a lot of interests
besides music. If I had just pursued singing, I wouldn’t have been
happy.”

She accepted a scholarship to The Oberlin College Conservatory of Music
in Ohio, where she could pursue both music and the liberal arts. At
Oberlin she majored in Spanish and vocal performance and kept physically
active, although her voice teacher told her she couldn’t play sports
because practice times conflicted with her commitment to the Oberlin
College Choir. As graduation approached, she faced the same choice as
when leaving high school: Grab for the brass ring in opera or go for a
more conventional career? Valerio opted for the latter.

She went to work in New York City for KPMG, a prestigious audit, tax,
and advisory consulting firm, and sang on the side, auditioning for The
Metropolitan Opera Chorus and other positions. She met her husband, Cito
Nikiema, a native of Burkina Faso in West Africa, one day while waiting
for the subway during a blizzard. Recalling the pleasure she took in
sports as a teenager, she started running road races put on by New York
Road Runners. She enrolled in an eight-week-long running class, learning
the craft of the sport in the same thorough way that she studied music.
Valerio seemed to be on her way, but success in the corporate world left
her unsatisfied. She decided to return to where she’d first blossomed,
taking a job teaching voice and music at the Masters School. “Actually,”
Theeman says, “I recruited her.”

“After my third day I was hooked,” Valerio says of the teaching
profession. The next year, she was hired at Masters as a full-time music
teacher. Thus began a career that would include teaching posts at a
private school in Maryland and a boarding school in New Jersey. In 2013,
Valerio accepted a job offer at the Rabun Gap School in Georgia, where
she is today.

</div>

<div class="body_ad site-wrapper"
style="background-image: url(https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/brooks-2220x1480-v2.jpg)"
onclick="window.location.href='https://bs.serving-sys.com/BurstingPipe/adServer.bs?cn=tf&amp;c=20&amp;mc=click&amp;pli=16573930&amp;PluID=0&amp;ord=[timestamp]';">

[![](https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/brooks-2220x1480-v2.jpg){.responsive-img
.hidden-img}](https://bs.serving-sys.com/BurstingPipe/adServer.bs?cn=tf&c=20&mc=click&pli=16573930&PluID=0&ord=%5Btimestamp%5D)

</div>

![pixel](https://bs.serving-sys.com/BurstingPipe/adServer.bs?cn=tf&c=19&mc=imp&pli=16573930&PluID=0&ord=%5Btimestamp%5D&rtu=-1)
<div class="article row">

[S]{.drop-cap}[itting may be]{.initial-cap} the new smoking, but that’s
not why Valerio weighs 250 pounds.

In 2014, U.K. researchers published a study suggesting that a
combination of high levels of physical activity and low levels of
sitting time was necessary to reduce the risks of obesity. Further, the
research showed that individuals reporting high levels of activity and
low levels of sitting were less likely to develop long-term obesity.

So could excess sitting be the trigger of Valerio’s seemingly anomalous
case of chronic obesity? Observing her in action through a typical day
at Rabun Gap School, the answer clearly is no.

Her day begins before dawn with a three-mile run around the school’s
hilly campus. Then she drives home, showers and dresses, wakes Rashid,
her 12-year-old son, and has breakfast with him before school. Then she
heads back to Rabun Gap for a full docket of teaching and interacting
with students, fellow teachers, and staff. During her second-period
high-school Spanish class, she is constantly on her feet, moving around
the room, taking advantage of the small class size to engage with each
student. In Spanish, she talks about her experiences as a runner. Race
photos and bib numbers decorate the wall above her desk.

In choir class, where she presides over a group of 34 kids, she takes a
more structured tack, with a little less joking and humor, but she’s
even more active, conducting, waving, gesticulating, moving with
light-footed grace. “People have a preconceived idea about the way a fat
person is supposed to act,” Valerio says between classes. “A fat person
is supposed to be depressed and lethargic and slow-moving. A fat person
is supposed to be diabetic and asthmatic and engage in a lot of
self-destructive behavior. I don’t act that way or look that way, and
so, once they get to know me, people stop seeing me as a fat person.”

In the afternoon, on the last day before the long Easter weekend, the
entire student body of the church-related private school convenes in the
auditorium for a chapel service. Valerio conducts the choir in a
rendition of a solemn hymn in Latin, and then it’s her turn to perform.
She stands for an unaccompanied solo version of the spiritual “Were You
There?” Her swelling soprano voice fills the theater, holding the
audience spellbound. Even the squirrelly middle-school kids sit raptly.
Valerio concludes to a cascade of applause.

After the assembly, out in the lobby, she accepts more accolades. Then,
finally, she sits for a moment, riffing on the tired old saw, “It ain’t
over till the fat lady sings.” “Of course, deep down, I would like to be
thinner,” she says. “Accepting my weight doesn’t mean I’m satisfied with
my weight. You meet a fat person who says otherwise, she’s lying.”

If Valerio weighed less, for one thing, she could run faster; a loss of
one pound increases speed by about two seconds per mile of running. “And
I’m well aware of the health risks of fat around the belly, and that
obesity increases the chance of developing rheumatoid arthritis,” she
continues. “I see myself as engaged in a long-term—maybe
lifelong—campaign to achieve and maintain a healthy weight. I’ve already
had my season of dramatic weight loss, and I don’t expect to go through
another one.”

</div>

<div class="site-wrapper"
style="background-image: url('https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/ultra-husband-son.jpg')">

![](https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/ultra-husband-son.jpg){.responsive-img
.hidden-img}

</div>

<div class="align-center hero">

Valerio with her husband, Cito Nikiema, and son, Rashid, at their home
in Rabun Gap. [/ Photograph by Bryan Meltz]{.credit}

</div>

<div class="article row">

[T]{.drop-cap}[hat season started]{.initial-cap} in crisis. On a late
summer evening in 2008, while driving through Pennsylvania’s Lehigh
Valley on Route 222, en route to New Jersey, where she then taught at
the Purnell School, a blazing star of pain rose in Mirna Valerio’s
chest. She felt certain she was having a heart attack and was terrified
that she was going to die. She was only 33, and her son, who was with
her, had just turned 5.

Rashid had developed a pernicious case of asthma that kept the child and
his mother up at night. Valerio would work all week at the Purnell
School on little sleep; on weekends, she supplemented her teacher’s
salary by giving music lessons in the Baltimore area, where she’d
previously taught. So on Saturday morning she’d drive three hours to
Maryland and give lessons all day, while a babysitter watched Rashid.
She wasn’t eating more than usual, but the exhausting schedule left
scant time or energy for exercise, and her weight ballooned north of 300
pounds. She knew she had to confront her obesity—which was now a matter
of health, not appearance—but she kept putting it off. Now, with a point
of pain digging a divot in the middle of her chest, Valerio was forced
to face herself.

She pulled over to the side of the road and tried to breathe. The pain
eased enough for her to keep driving. If she could just make it to the
home of one of her colleagues from the Purnell School. By the time
Valerio pulled into her colleague’s driveway, she was sure she was
dying. Her friend graciously opened her home to Rashid and drove Valerio
to the hospital emergency room.

There, Valerio received a mixed verdict. The good news: no evidence of a
heart attack; doctors believed that Valerio had suffered a panic attack
brought on by stress and exhaustion. The bad news: Blood tests showed
extensive arterial inflammation. “Combined with my weight, it wasn’t a
question of if I’d have a coronary or stroke, but when,” Valerio says.
She was discharged from the ER but referred to a cardiologist.

She saw the specialist the next week: Dr. Freilich, a blunt-talking man
from Brooklyn. “He looked at my charts, looked at me, and leaned across
his desk,” Valerio recalls. “ ‘How old is your son again?’ he asked me.

“ ‘Five,’ I told him.”

“ ‘Want to be alive when he’s older?’ ” Valerio saw no need to reply.

“Then lose 15 pounds in the next two months,” the doctor said. That got
her attention, but what really nailed it was a follow-up appointment
with her primary care physician. Valerio was in the office when the doc
got called away. Her file was open on the desk. She leaned over and took
a peek at the diagnosis. “Patient is morbidly obese.”

“*Morbidly obese*,” Valerio says. “Those words hit me between the eyes.”

She called Nikki Buccello. Buccello was a colleague at the Purnell
School, a math teacher almost as intense as Valerio. The two women would
get talking over a glass of wine and in an hour have outlined an entire
diversity curriculum. Valerio knew that Buccello wanted to lose weight
for a wedding she’d be attending in September. Now it was June, the end
of the academic year. They had the whole summer in front of them, with
the school’s facilities at their disposal. “ ‘Before we get started, I’m
warning you,’ ” Buccello recalls Valerio telling her. “ ‘I’m the kind of
person that once I begin something, I really get into it.’ ”

“I said, ‘Whoa, sister, who do you think you’re talking to?’ ”

The two women dove into an intense exercise routine. They ran, hit the
gym, and played tennis in afternoon heat and humidity. “We gave up junk
food and obvious stuff, but neither of us was into a starvation diet,”
Buccello says. “Mirna loves food and cooking. She makes grocery shopping
a sensuous experience.”

Recalling the 5Ks she enjoyed during the years she worked in Manhattan,
Valerio suggested that they enter a local road race in New Jersey.
“Sure,” Buccello said. “We can work up to it and try one in a few
weeks.”

“Actually,” Valerio said, “there’s a 5K tonight. I already paid our
entry fees.”

<div class="align-center hero">

![](https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/ultra-stretches.jpg){.full-width-img}
Valerio stretches with a group of friends before a morning run. “You
just can’t say no to Mirna,” says one. [/ Photograph by Bryan
Meltz]{.credit}

</div>

They started doing a 5K each week, sometimes more than one. Buccello
would run until she got tired, and then walk. Valerio steamed along at
her steady 13-minute pace. They rarely finished last.

“For me, running has always been a necessary evil, something I endure
for the pounds to come off,” says Buccello, whose weight dropped from
185 to 150 that summer. “But Mirna loves running for its own sake. It’s
paradoxical, almost funny in a way, but it seems like, big as she is,
Mirna has a gift for running long distances. She doesn’t start to feel
good until she’s covered five or 10 miles.”

Still, matters that most runners take for granted—from finding clothes
to avoiding chafing to simply melting invisibly into the pack at the
starting line—were an ordeal for Valerio. Even though she had every
apparent motive to hate running, Valerio loved it. “I fell in love with
the usual things,” she says. “The endorphins, the goal setting, the way
running evened out my thinking, the taste of the air at dawn.”

At Valerio’s prodding, she and Buccello graduated to 10Ks. Then, over
her friend’s protests, Valerio entered them in a 15-mile trail race at
the Jersey Shore, which they drove to amid a wild thunderstorm. “Let’s
go home,” Buccello said. “No way they’re going to have the race in this
weather.”

“Maybe it’ll clear up,” Valerio said.

But the storm raged even stronger at the shore. The race was canceled
and the women drove home. “I was relieved, but Mirna was really bummed,”
Buccello remembers. “She was so disappointed that I let her talk me into
meeting at 6 o’clock the next morning to run 15 miles on our own. She
was so excited about getting that run in that I did my best to suffer in
silence.”

As the summer wore on, the legend of Mirna Valerio grew. Colleagues from
work and their families came out to road races to cheer the women.
Valerio dropped a total of 27 pounds, getting down to the 270 range. Her
blood pressure, resting heart rate, and cholesterol readings dropped
down to healthy levels, and the dangerous inflammation in her arteries
calmed. Perhaps most gratifying, her doctor struck the “morbidly obese”
diagnosis from Valerio’s medical chart.

</div>

<div class="article row">

[W]{.drop-cap}[e have now reached]{.initial-cap} the climax of the
standard weight-loss narrative, when the cascade effects of running,
healthy eating, and other positive changes produce a metabolic
sea-change. The former fatty continues to shed her avoirdupois,
transforming into a new woman. She goes from 240 to 120, and from size
18 to size 8. Her PRs drop in tandem with her BMI; she qualifies for
Boston. Calories out exceed calories in: a morality tale we have read
hundreds of times, often in the pages of *Runner’s World*.

But instead of continuing on the familiar arc, the story of Mirna
Valerio hits an impasse; one possibly more common than a Disney-style
breakthrough, but much less publicized. Valerio had embraced every
aspect of the running life, from training to racing to nutrition. She
had even started coaching her school’s cross-country team. But while no
longer morbidly obese, she remained obese.

“No matter how much I run and work out, my weight never goes below
around 240 pounds,” Valerio says. “I don’t know why. I eat a lot of
healthy food, but no more than most skinny distance runners I know, and
I don’t secretly binge on pizza and cookies and potato chips. I’m just
not interested in starving myself on some 1500-calorie-a-day plan,
losing a bunch of weight, then gaining it right back because my diet is
totally unrealistic.”

Valerio’s supporters say she has worked her weight to a healthy,
sustainable set point. Her critics could insist that by accepting
obesity, she also accepts a greater chance of debilitating disease, and
the likelihood of a significantly shorter life span.

However, ideas ranging from a round earth to women’s suffrage were also
once novel and unsettling. Recent scientific evidence reveals a few
provocative truths: What you do is more important than what you weigh;
and what you weigh is determined by myriad factors, some beyond an
individual’s control.

[“I]{.drop-cap}[’d never say]{.initial-cap} weight doesn’t matter,” says
Martha Gulati, M.D., director of the Women’s Cardiovascular Health
Program at The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center. “Weight will
always influence a number of important health variables. But compared to
the effect of exercise, weight and BMI have been proven to be secondary.
By far, physical activity and physical fitness has been shown to be the
single most important factor in maintaining good health, regardless of
one’s body weight.”

Early this year, a study of 300,000 men and women in Europe conducted by
U.K. researchers at the University of Cambridge found that twice as many
deaths may be linked to lack of physical activity compared with the
number of deaths linked to obesity. The study also found that a modest
amount of physical activity, the equivalent of a brisk daily 20-minute
walk, produced significant health benefits, even for people with a high
BMI.

Long-term studies by the Cooper Clinic in Dallas found that the death
rate for adults who are thin but unfit was at least twice that of fit
obese individuals, and that fitness provided protection against early
death regardless of body weight.

In short, exercise in general, including moderate exercise such as
walking and vigorous exercise such as running, benefits everybody,
regardless of weight. By the same token, physical activity, not diet,
forms the behavioral key to achieving and maintaining a healthy weight.

By this logic, weight control would seem to be a simple matter of
calories in/calories out. Burn more calories than you consume, and your
body will adapt by burning fat. The pounds will drop away and you can
buy new clothes, and stand a better shot at rewards ranging from getting
promoted to getting a date. It seems an ineluctable law of physics, a
*Biggest Loser* calculus relentlessly drummed into our brains by the
American media. Hence the suspicion that dogs Mirna Valerio: If she runs
so much, how can she still be fat?

“If controlling obesity were a simple matter of calories in and calories
out,” says Ludwig, “I would be out of a job.”

“The calories-in/calories-out idea is ridiculously simplistic,” says
Freedhoff. “It’s like a financial adviser telling an investor to buy low
and sell high.”

Ludwig explains that weight loss, gain, and control are complex
biological processes. “It’s a combination of genetic, behavioral,
environmental, and psychological factors, and varies tremendously from
individual to individual,” he says. “In many ways, obesity is similar to
complex diseases such as cancer.”

Dr. Steven Blair, P.E.D., the lead author of the Cooper Clinic studies
who is now a professor in the Arnold School of Public Health at the
University of South Carolina, agrees. "If you fashioned a hypothetical
world in which every person ran 10 miles a day and subsisted on the same
daily ration of carrots, you would still have a full range of body
types, from svelte to stout.”

“Imagine our bodies as cars,” Freedhoff says. “They come out of the
factory with various fuel efficiencies—an SUV’s is always going to be
different than a sub-compact’s. How you drive definitely affects
mileage, but the SUV is never going to burn less fuel than the
subcompact.

“Well, just like cars, our bodies are all wired with their own
distinctive genetic makeups. We can modify our BMI through exercise and
diet, but only to an extent. Some of us are subcompacts, others are
SUVs, and one type isn’t inherently ‘better’ than another. We can be
healthy and happy no matter how much we weigh.”

Mirna Valerio has been wise enough and brave enough to strike this
balance. Through years of hard but mostly happy work, she has attained
her own healthy weight. She accepts herself without being satisfied with
herself. “Instead of wondering, *If she runs so much, how come she’s not
skinny?* we could be wondering, *How heavy would she be if she didn’t
run?*” says Blair. “*Is she a good person? Is she active, healthy, and
contributing to the world?* Those questions are far more pertinent and
interesting than asking what she weighs.”

“A woman like Mirna makes an excellent role model,” Ludwig says. “She
reinforces the fundamentals: Work out, be active, and eat a high-quality
diet. Weight loss should be the by-product of a healthy life, not the
goal.”

</div>

<div class="article row">

[A]{.drop-cap}[t 6 o’clock]{.initial-cap} in the morning, her headlamp
lancing the predawn darkness, Mirna Valerio stands in the parking lot
above the track at Rabun Gap-Nacoochee School, meeting Rebecca Smith and
three other women teachers, regulars in the running group that Valerio
joined when she came to the school two years before.

At first she had resisted the Rabun Gap recruiter—“the last thing I
wanted was to live in the South”—but she came down for a visit and was
impressed by the educational philosophy, the elegant campus, the access
to mountain running trails, and the chance for Rashid to go to school at
a reduced tuition rate.

In 2011, Valerio launched her first marathon campaign, aiming for the
Marine Corps Marathon in Washington, D.C. “The marathon was a big step
for me,” she says. “I realized I was at risk, so I went to a
pulmonologist, told him what I’d been doing, and what I had planned. ‘So
am I going to drop dead?’ I asked him. He said, ‘Seriously? No way!’ Due
to all the changes I had made, my chances of dropping dead were greatly
reduced. He told me to go for it.”

Valerio started training in her thorough manner, using a plan from Jenny
Hadfield and John Bingham. Everything was going fine until she rolled
her ankle on a downhill during a half marathon. X-rays showed an
avulsion fracture. With only eight weeks until the marathon, Valerio was
devastated. She went to an orthopedist who was also a runner. “She gave
me a cross-training program and said I could still do my marathon after
three weeks in a boot and no running for eight weeks,” Valerio says. She
gradually healed, and in November she and her husband and son drove to
D.C. for the race. In many ways it was as much a death march for Valerio
as that first agonizing lap around the high-school hockey field. She
lurched and sweated and chafed and suffered, running just ahead of the
bus that picked up stragglers who hadn’t reached the 14th Street Bridge
by the cutoff time. Then at mile 16 she found her second wind; as always
she felt stronger the longer she ran. She crossed the finish line in
tears, with Rashid and Cito cheering her on.

Shortly afterward she was drawn to trail running and ultras. The longer
the better, by Valerio’s lights, and she took to the solitude and
challenge of the mountains. She also liked the comradeship and spirit of
the trail-running community. “My first long trail race, an 18-mile loop
course, I was out about nine miles from the start and was suffering,”
Valerio recalls. “I had blisters, cuts, mosquito bites, you name it. I
stood at the side of the trail. I didn’t think I could go on. Then a
runner came along, an older guy. He asked if I was all right, if I had
enough water and gels. He could see I was tired and discouraged, but I
wasn’t sick or injured. ‘Well, it’s a long way back to your car and
there’s only one way to get there,’ he said. ‘Maybe you better get
started.’ I love that attitude about trail runners.”

<div class="align-left">

![](https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/ultra-race-grid.jpg){.responsive-img}
Clockwise from top left: 2013 Finger Lakes 50s 25K; 2010 North Face
Half; 2013 Great Alaskan Marathon Cruise 5K. [/ Photographs courtesy of
Mirna Valerio]{.credit}

</div>

Indeed, on both trails and roads, Valerio’s detractors form a shrinking
minority. “In all the events she’s done with us, I haven’t seen anyone
be anything but accepting of Mirna,” says Rick McNulty, co-director of
the New Jersey Trail Series. “In fact, the first race she did with us,
she was the one who raised issues. She didn’t want to be a burden. She
didn’t want someone waiting around for hours for her to finish. I
assured her it wouldn’t be a problem.”

Now, other than the morning runs at school, Valerio mostly runs on
trails. When she feels weary, or especially inspired, she’ll rear back
and belt out songs by Luther Vandross or Schubert. “Schubert and the
mountains just go together,” she says.

She started her *Fat Girl Running* blog in 2011. “I’d go to races and
hardly ever see anyone my size,” she says. “There were classifications
like Athena. But that was for women 165 pounds and up. 165 pounds? They
call that big? I wanted to encourage other big women runners, give them
information, let them know they’re not alone.”

Back at the dawn run at Rabun Gap, Valerio gathers the women for the
ritual selfie. She looks for the boy she’d met the day before, but he
hasn’t shown. “No surprise,” she says. “I’ll keep trying.”

The women start their run in darkness. Headlights probe the highway in
the valley below campus. They listen to the morning surge of birdsong,
and the boom and wash of distant trucks. Gradually, the mountains take
shape against a graying sky. White tufts of fog hang in the hollows.

“I love this time of day,” Smith says as they work past the dark
high-school dormitory. “The kids are still asleep.”

“Not all of them,” Valerio says, moving in a stride that at first looks
labored but after awhile appears powerful, implacable, her wide hips
swinging, her arms pitching rhythmically across her trunk, her feet
hitting the pavement steadily and quietly.

“I bet one or two kids are awake and watching us,” Valerio says.
“Someday, in class, one of them will ask about my running. We’ll start
talking, I’ll tell my story, and some morning soon that girl or boy will
be out here running with us.”
![](https://rw.runnersworld.com/selects/images/rw-end-bug.svg)

</div>

<div class="article row">

[Story Update · October 6, 2016]{.update-header} “Once I met Mirna and
spent time around her, it was like, wow,” writer John Brant says. “In
many ways running was the least interesting thing about her. The nerve
her story touched blew me away.” Indeed, much has changed for Mirna
Valerio since this story came out. She was profiled on NBC *Nightly
News*, became a sponsored ambassador for Merrell, and landed a book
deal. She also spent the latter half of 2015 racking up finishes at
escalating distances, including a 12-hour run in Pennsylvania (in which
she logged 31.5 miles), the Georgia Jewel 35-miler, and the Javelina
Jundred trail 100K, which she ran in just under 26 hours. So far this
year, Valerio has run a pair of 25Ks, a marathon, a 50K, and is
targeting both the New York City and Marine Corps marathons this fall.
Since becoming a global ambassador for Merrell, she’s also started doing
Tough Mudders. Valerio has been balancing all of this with a promotion
at her day job: She’s now the director of equity and inclusion at the
Rabun Gap-Nacoochee School in addition to her responsibilities as a
Spanish instructor and cross-country coach. Her memoir, titled *A
Beautiful Work in Progress*, is scheduled to be published by Grand
Harbor Press in October 2017. “It’s not necessarily about me being a fat
athlete—I want to reach out to anybody who wants to feel good in their
own skin, exercise, and enjoy things that they may not feel able or
welcome to do,” she says. “I feel that I’ve been given this huge gift of
being able to reach people. If I can continue to inspire and motivate
others, why shouldn’t I?” *–Nick Weldon*[Back to Top **]{#scrollToTop}

