# How I scored my first UX/UI job in 5 months with no work experience \|

### by Ewelina Adamczak \| May, 2021 \| Bootcamp

Â· 7 min read

# []{#anchor}[]{#anchor-2}No work experience? No degree? No problem!

A few months ago, if you asked me to design a wireframe, create a user
flow, or do a stakeholder analysis, I'd stare at you blankly. I hardly
had any technical or visual skills. However, what I did have was passion
and ambition. So, I decided to give it my best shot. Turns out, I would
reap rewards I wouldn't have expected, within a timeframe, I definitely
wouldn't have thought possible.

That's why I'm here today to tell you what I did to get my first
(\*paid\*) position as a UX/UI designer.

# []{#anchor}[]{#anchor-3}Get a mentor, supporter, or design buddy

It's hard to know where to start with a field as broad as UX. That's why
I recommend finding someone who can guide and support you on your
journey.

In my case, I was fortunate to receive mentorship from a ed-tech company
I interned for this past fall. Even though I worked pro-bono, I received
a lot of help when it came to learning different UX/UI strategies,
tools, and concepts. I was able to expedite my learning massively by
implementing what I was learning as I was learning it.

ðŸ“¸ Credit to [Le Wagon](https://unsplash.com/@lewagon). Find people who
can help you on your journey and push you forward!

Now, while I know that my situation was unique (in that I didn\'t have
to pay for mentorship), I'd say that you don't necessarily need to pay
for mentorship when you're just starting out in UX/UI. If money is tight
(as it was for me), there are a bunch of resources available open-source
on the web to get you started. Here are a few I highly recommend:

1.  []{#anchor}[Invision](https://www.invisionapp.com/inside-design/)
    --- for design tips from experts in the field. Their blog is a
    sure-fire way to explore UX step-by-step, at your own time and
    convenience.
2.  []{#anchor-4}[UX Collective](https://uxdesign.cc/) --- my all-around
    best design publication on Medium from design aficionados from
    around the globe.
3.  []{#anchor-5}[Booklets.io](https://www.booklets.io/c/ux-design) ---
    if reading extensive design articles is not your style, check out
    this resource to get UX/UI tips in bite-sized portions.
4.  []{#anchor-6}[Nielsen Norman
    Group](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/) --- for all things UX,
    from research to user testing.

Never underestimate the potential of free resources, as they can get you
far as long as you commit to your learning.

# []{#anchor-7}[]{#anchor-8}Take note of great work

As designers, we are constantly coming up with creative solutions to
problems. Whether that means trying out new trends or developing the
best user experience for our customers, studying others' work is what
helps us improve our skills.

ðŸ“¸ Credit to [TM](https://weare.tm/). One of the top inspiring websites
presented by Awwwards.

During my own UX/UI journey, I've found it critical to take note of, not
only what designs stand out to me, but also to understand the reasoning
for my penchant for them. Whenever we like a particular user interface,
we have to understand, on a psychological level, what design decisions
have made this design successful and effective at communicating a given
message. Here are a few things to consider when evaluating a given
design:

1.  []{#anchor-7}**typography**: closely examine the hierarchy of text,
    font choice, text size, line spacing, alignment, and letter spacing
    (for more, check out these [typography
    rules](https://blog.prototypr.io/8-rules-for-perfect-typography-in-ui-21b37f6f23ce))
2.  []{#anchor-9}**color schemes**: take note of what colors are being
    used, the feeling that the colors prompt (i.e.Â [color
    psychology](https://uxdesign.cc/color-effect-b78fae8bb72f)), the
    contrast, the ways in which they are being used ([60--30--10
    rule](https://www.flowmapp.com/glossary-term/60-30-10-rule)), and
    the [WCAG accessibility guidelines](https://accessible-colors.com/)
    that they meet
3.  []{#anchor-10}**layout**: pay attention to how the interface is laid
    out, the grid that is being used, the alignment, the padding and
    margins, as well as the white space that is given between elements
    (for more on layout, check out this [amazing
    read](https://medium.com/design-with-figma/everything-you-need-to-know-as-a-ui-designer-about-spacing-layout-grids-2bc269e12321))
4.  []{#anchor-11}**images/illustration/icons**: examine how the images
    visually express the text, [function as
    signifiers](https://boxesandarrows.com/optimizing-ui-icons-for-faster-recognition/)
    for particular user actions, and solidify a certain mood for the
    design interface

Having through these design decisions, it might also be beneficial for
you to critique the work that you see and pinpoint areas that could use
(re)work. As beginner designers, it's easy to be transfixed by the
amazing work that experts are doing, but we have to realize that there
are always areas of improvement. Pinpointing these will allow us to
think of ways in which we can improve our own designs.

# []{#anchor-12}[]{#anchor-13}Identify problems, find inspiration, & get designing

One of the most common dilemmas of novice UX designers is not knowing
what to design or how to begin a portfolio without landing a job. Well,
you're in luck because there are a ton of tools out there to help you
come up with new design concepts and ideas, such as:

-   []{#anchor-12}[ideasgrab.com](https://www.ideasgrab.com/) --- for a
    whopping list of over 3,500 design ideas
-   []{#anchor-14}[sharpen](https://sharpen.design/) --- a design
    challenge generator for branding, marketing, and UX/UI design

Aside from design prompt ideas, I've found it beneficial to look at the
websites and apps that I visit most often and redesign them. This will
allow you to survey what the interface is doing else and what changes
could be made to make the design more intuitive, effective, fun, useful,
or appealing to the end user.

ðŸ“¸ Credit to: [Masudur Rahman Joy](https://www.uplabs.com/joy_748). A
clean web interface redesign for Instagram.

Once you have an idea, take a go at it! At this point, you may be
inclined to jump straight into designing the interface itself; however,
it would be most beneficial, particularly in the beginning, to do user
research, explore current solutions that exist, and sketch out a few
ideas.

On the other hand, if your focus is to strengthen a particular skill
within UX/UI, such as hierarchy or typography, feel free to look at
design work that has successfully accomplished these before starting.
This will give you a better feel for what does and doesn't work, while
also giving you the inspiration you need to make your idea come to life.

# []{#anchor-15}[]{#anchor-16}Use whatever tools you have on hand

When starting out in UX/UI design, a lot of us are overwhelmed by the
extend of design software available to us. Instead of spending eons to
find the 'best tool,' pick one (for starters) and work with it. As you
progress, you'll see that what you learn in one software can be easily
translated to another. At the end of the day, the tool you choose isn't
what's important. It's how you use it that matters.

Pick a tool and get started!

Speaking from my own experience, I've focused mainly on
[Figma](https://www.figma.com/design/) throughout my UX/UI journey,
mainly because it is free and allows for easy sharing and collaboration.
However, if you already have other design software, like any of the
[Adobe Suite](https://www.adobe.com/creativecloud.html) software or
[Sketch](https://www.sketch.com/), use those.

# []{#anchor-15}[]{#anchor-17}Post your work

Now, I know how hard and intimidating it is to post work as a beginner
designer. I, myself, have doubted the quality of my work for quite a
while, so posting, what I assumed was beginner work, was quite the feat
for me. No matter what your level of experience is, one of the most
important steps you can take in UX/UI is building out your portfolio and
putting your work out there.

Thankfully, the digital world we live in today makes it super easy to
get your work seen by others. Even if you don't have a personal
portfolio site, you can start posting you work in seconds through
[Dribble](https://dribbble.com/) or [Behance](https://www.behance.net/).

Start posting on Dribble today and see where it takes you!

As you progress on your journey, you'll see your designs improving bit
by bit. You're also increase your chances of being noticed by design
companies who are looking for talented designers with fresh and
innovative ideas. That's how I got my first job contract.

At the end of the day, starting out in UX/UI can be intimidating. But,
just like with anything, you have to work at it day in and day out. No
matter where you start --- whether you're a student or a professional
looking for a career change --- with perseverance and a solid work
ethic, you put yourself on a fast track to landing that UX/UI job you've
been dreaming of.

To part, I leave you with the wise words of Pele, who put it succinctly:

Success is no accident. It is hard work, perseverance, learning,
studying, sacrifice and most of all, love of what you are doing or
learning to do.

[](https://bootcamp.uxdesign.cc/?source=post_sidebar--------------------------post_sidebar-----------)

## []{#anchor-15}[]{#anchor-18}Bootcamp

From idea to product, one lesson at a time.

Written by

## []{#anchor-15}[]{#anchor-18}[Ewelina Adamczak](https://ewelinkafl58.medium.com/?source=follow_footer-------------------------------------)

Writing to inspire. Designing with empathy. Advocating for equality.
Fighting for a better world. ðŸŒŽ

## []{#anchor-15}[]{#anchor-18}[Bootcamp](https://bootcamp.uxdesign.cc/?source=follow_footer-------------------------------------)

A living collection of resources and case studies for designers starting
in Design, UX, and UI. Bootcamp is a new product design publication from
the team behind the UX Collective (http://uxdesign.cc). To submit your
story: bootcamp\@uxdesign.cc

Written by

## []{#anchor-15}[]{#anchor-18}[Ewelina Adamczak](https://ewelinkafl58.medium.com/?source=follow_footer-------------------------------------)

Writing to inspire. Designing with empathy. Advocating for equality.
Fighting for a better world. ðŸŒŽ

## []{#anchor-15}[]{#anchor-18}[Bootcamp](https://bootcamp.uxdesign.cc/?source=follow_footer-------------------------------------)

A living collection of resources and case studies for designers starting
in Design, UX, and UI. Bootcamp is a new product design publication from
the team behind the UX Collective (http://uxdesign.cc). To submit your
story: bootcamp\@uxdesign.cc

## []{#anchor-15}[]{#anchor-18}More From Medium

## []{#anchor-15}[]{#anchor-18}[User Stories are ill-suited for expressing requirements](../../../../../../user-stories-are-ill-suited-for-expressing-requirements-fa0bbd7756c4%3Fsource=post_internal_links---------0----------------------------)

[Maarten
Dalmijn](https://mdalmijn.medium.com/?source=post_internal_links---------0----------------------------)
in
[Bootcamp](https://bootcamp.uxdesign.cc/?source=post_internal_links---------0----------------------------)

## []{#anchor-15}[]{#anchor-18}[10 things I've learned about product design while working in Japan](../../../../../../10-things-ive-learned-about-product-design-while-working-in-japan-f2e00c356b05%3Fsource=post_internal_links---------1----------------------------)
