## 2019-01-09

This text is being written with love, joy, and fun. It needs not to be the biggest text ever, and it may well be forgotten amongst the infinity of digital copies and trees turned into paper. And at the same time it tries to make some important points, not to be left aside. This is why one may need a certain degree of attention to go through it, sometimes in a not so easy way. Because science can be fun, but serious too, and sometimes neither or both at the same time. 

Why always the need for a prelude? Because raw material is not always processed and understandable and shareable. Because maye accessing a black and white text is bizarre enough that one needs to make it entertaining, to read, as well as during the writing process. And yet, what would happen if the writer would like to reach a wider audience? Maybe one could flirt with the idea that if all of this would turn into a short info-mercial video, to be shot in three minutes more people would be able to access it. And the producers would put more effort in trimming the edges and non-sensical redundancies that make a message unclear. 

Because we have became used to reading text over paper and screen it seems that black and white information is a given. But what would happen if we show black and white videos? Would that make a documentary less interesting? Certainly the interviewees become much more eager and enthusiastic when asked to participate in a film than over a book. Maybe a B&W film could attain a middle ground. The point to be highlighted is not the mixture of half way emotions between boring and entertaining but rather that a black and white film could be more affordable for the amateur film ethnographer that wants to try a new (a)venue. Would you like to be in this interview? Would you like to watch it? 

Maybe I could add some shapes over the pictures to make more dream-like as in Linklater's *Waking Life*. Also that could help to draw significant points and ~~stereotype~~ typify and cut through certain lenses, with the additional benefit of resting some always imposed self-importance that science so desperately seeks for. And claiming it back at the same time, but another optic. Could you share that camera filter please? I need some help on the post-production and distribution. Do you have a friend in the National TV so that we can reach more people? Even a simple written composition can reach another single reader if they can browse the internet through a matrix-like aesthetic terminal console through a unix system, or any computer or tablet device for that matter.
