-   [](http://twitter.com/lithub)
-   [](http://facebook.com/lithub)
-   [](http://instagram.com/literaryhub/)

[Literary Hub](https://lithub.com)


Haruki Murakami: The Moment I Became a Novelist
===============================================

### At a Baseball Game in 1978, The Writer Who Almost Wasn't

By [Haruki Murakami](https://lithub.com/author/haruki-murakami/)

June 25, 2015

*The following is the introduction to Haruki Murakami’s* [Wind/Pinball:
Two Novels](http://knopfdoubleday.com/book/235279/windpinball/), *out
August 4th from Knopf.*

**The Birth of My Kitchen Table Fiction**

Most people—by which I mean most of us who are a part of Japanese
society—graduate from school, then find work, then, after some time has
passed, get married. Even I originally intended to follow that pattern.
Or at least that was how I imagined things would turn out. Yet in
reality I married, then started working, then (somehow) finally managed
to graduate. In other words, the order I followed was the exact opposite
of what was considered normal.

Since I hated the idea of working for a company, I decided to open my
own establishment, a place where people could go to listen to jazz
records, have a coffee, eat snacks, and drink. It was a simple, rather
happy-go-lucky kind of idea: running a business like that, I figured,
would let me relax listening to my favorite music from morning till
night. The problem was, since we had married while still in university
we had no money. Therefore, for the first three years, my wife and I
worked like slaves, often taking on several jobs at once to save as much
as we could. After that, I made the rounds borrowing whatever friends
and family could spare. Then we took all the money we had managed to
scrape together and opened a small coffee shop / bar in Kokubunji, a
student hangout, in the western suburbs of Tokyo. It was 1974.

It cost a lot less to open your own place back then than it does now.
Young people like us who were determined to avoid “company life” at all
costs were launching small shops left and right. Cafés and restaurants,
variety stores, bookstores—you name it. Several places near us were
owned and run by people of our generation. Kokubunji retained a strong
counterculture vibe, and many of those who hung around the area were
dropouts from the shrinking student movement. It was an era when, all
over the world, one could still find gaps in the system.

I brought my old upright piano from my parents’ house and began offering
live music on weekends. There were many young jazz musicians living in
the Kokubunji area who happily (I think) played for the small amount we
could pay them. Many went on to become well-known musicians; I sometimes
run across them in jazz clubs around Tokyo even now.

Although we were doing what we liked, paying our debts was a constant
struggle. We owed the bank, and we owed the people who had supported us.
On one occasion, stuck for our monthly payment to the bank, my wife and
I were trudging along with our heads down late at night when we stumbled
across some money lying in the street. Whether it was synchronicity or
some sort of divine intercession I don’t know, but the amount was
exactly what we needed. Since the payment was due the next day, it was
truly a last-minute reprieve. (Strange events like this have happened at
various junctures in my life.) Most Japanese would have probably done
the proper thing, and turned the money in to the police, but stretched
to the limit as we were, we couldn’t live by such fine sentiments.

Still it was fun. No question about that. I was young and in my prime,
could listen to my favorite music all day long, and was the lord of my
own little domain. I didn’t have to squeeze onto packed commuter trains,
or attend mind-numbing meetings, or suck up to a boss who I disliked.
Instead, I had the chance to meet all kinds of interesting people.

Article continues after advertisement

My twenties were thus spent paying off loans and doing hard physical
labor (making sandwiches and cocktails, hustling foul-mouthed patrons
out the door) from morning till night. After a few years, our landlord
decided to renovate the Kokubunji building, so we moved to more
up-to-date and spacious digs near the center of Tokyo, in Sendagaya. Our
new location provided enough room for a grand piano, but our debt
increased as a result. So things weren’t any easier.

Looking back, all I can remember is how hard we worked. I imagine most
people are relatively laid back in their twenties, but we had virtually
no time to enjoy the “carefree days of youth.” We barely got by. What
free time I did have, though, I spent reading. Along with music, books
were my great joy. No matter how busy, or how broke, or how exhausted I
was, no one could take those pleasures away from me.

As the end of my twenties approached, our Sendagaya jazz bar was, at
last, beginning to show signs of stability. True, we couldn’t sit back
and relax—we still owed money, and our sales had their ups and downs—but
at least things seemed headed in a good direction.

\* \* \* \*

One bright April afternoon in 1978, I attended a baseball game at Jingu
Stadium, not far from where I lived and worked. It was the Central
League season opener, first pitch at one o’clock, the Yakult Swallows
against the Hiroshima Carp. I was already a Swallows fan in those days,
so I sometimes popped in to catch a game—a substitute, as it were, for
taking a walk.

Back then, the Swallows were a perennially weak team (you might guess as
much from their name) with little money and no flashy big-name players.
Naturally, they weren’t very popular. Season opener it may have been,
but only a few fans were sitting beyond the outfield fence. I stretched
out with a beer to watch the game. At the time there were no bleacher
seats out there, just a grassy slope. The sky was a sparkling blue, the
draft beer as cold as could be, and the ball strikingly white against
the green field, the first green I had seen in a long while. The
Swallows first batter was Dave Hilton, a skinny newcomer from the States
and a complete unknown. He batted in the leadoff position. The cleanup
hitter was Charlie Manuel, who later became famous as the manager of the
Cleveland Indians and the Philadelphia Phillies. Then, though, he was a
real stud, a slugger the Japanese fans had dubbed “the Red Demon.”

I think Hiroshima’s starting pitcher that day was Yoshiro Sotokoba.
Yakult countered with Takeshi Yasuda. In the bottom of the first inning,
Hilton slammed Sotokoba’s first pitch into left field for a clean
double. The satisfying crack when the bat met the ball resounded
throughout Jingu Stadium. Scattered applause rose around me. In that
instant, for no reason and on no grounds whatsoever, the thought
suddenly struck me*: I think I can write a novel*.

I can still recall the exact sensation. It felt as if something had come
fluttering down from the sky, and I had caught it cleanly in my hands. I
had no idea why it had *chanced* to fall into my grasp. I didn’t know
then, and I don’t know now. Whatever the reason, *it* had taken place.
It was like a revelation. Or maybe epiphany is the closest word. All I
can say is that my life was drastically and permanently altered in that
instant—when Dave Hilton belted that beautiful, ringing double at Jingu
Stadium.

After the game (Yakult won as I recall), I took the train to Shinjuku
and bought a sheaf of writing paper and a fountain pen. Word processors
and computers weren’t around back then, which meant we had to write
everything by hand, one character at a time. The sensation of writing
felt very fresh. I remember how thrilled I was. It had been such a long
time since I had put fountain pen to paper.

Each night after that, when I got home late from work, I sat at my
kitchen table and wrote. Those few hours before dawn were practically
the only time I had free. Over the six or so months that followed I
wrote *Hear the Wind Sing.* I wrapped up the first draft right around
the time the baseball season ended. Incidentally, that year the Yakult
Swallows bucked the odds and almost everyone’s predictions to win the
Central League pennant, then went on to defeat the Pacific League
champions, the pitching-rich Hankyu Braves in the Japan Series. It was
truly a miraculous season that sent the hearts of all Yakult fans
soaring.

\* \* \* \*

*Hear the Wind Sing* is a short work, closer to a novella than a novel.
Yet it took many months and much effort to complete. Part of the reason,
of course, was the limited amount of time I had to work on it, but the
greater problem was that I hadn’t a clue about how to write a novel. To
tell the truth, although I was reading all kinds of stuff, my favorites
being 19th-century Russian novels and American hard-boiled detective
stories, I had never taken a serious look at contemporary Japanese
fiction. Thus I had no idea what kind of Japanese novels were being read
at the time, or how I should write fiction in the Japanese language.

For several months, I operated on pure guesswork, adopting what seemed
to be a likely style and running with it. When I read through the
result, though, I was far from impressed. It seemed to fulfill the
formal requirements of a novel, but it was somewhat boring, and the book
as a whole left me cold. If that’s the way the author feels, I thought,
a reader’s reaction will probably be even more negative. Looks like I
just don’t have what it takes, I thought dejectedly. Under normal
circumstances, it would have ended there—I would have walked away. But
the epiphany I had received on Jingu Stadium’s grassy slope was still
clearly etched in my mind.

In retrospect, it was only natural that I was unable to produce a good
novel. It was a big mistake to assume that a guy like me who had never
written anything in his life could spin off something brilliant right
off the bat. I was trying to accomplish the impossible. Give up trying
to write something sophisticated, I told myself. Forget all those
prescriptive ideas about “the novel” and “literature” and set down your
feelings and thoughts as they come to you, freely, in a way that you
like.

While it was easy to talk about setting down one’s impressions freely,
doing it wasn’t all that simple. For a sheer beginner like myself it was
especially hard. To make a fresh start, the first thing I had to do was
get rid of my stack of manuscript paper and my fountain pen. As long as
they were sitting in front of me, what I was doing felt like
“literature.” In their place, I pulled out my old Olivetti typewriter
from the closet. Then, as an experiment, I decided to write the opening
of my novel in English. Since I was willing to try anything, I figured,
why not give that a shot?

Needless to say, my ability in English composition didn’t amount to
much. My vocabulary was severely limited, as was my command of English
syntax. I could only write in simple, short sentences. That meant that,
however complex and numerous the thoughts running around my head might
be, I couldn’t even attempt to set them down as they came to me. The
language had to be simple, my ideas expressed in an easy-to-understand
way, the descriptions stripped of all extraneous fat, the form made
compact, and everything arranged to fit a container of limited size. The
result was a rough, uncultivated kind of prose. As I struggled to
express myself in that fashion, however, step by step, a distinctive
rhythm began to take shape.

Since I was born and raised in Japan, the vocabulary and patterns of the
Japanese language had filled the system that was *me* to bursting, like
a barn crammed with livestock. When I sought to put my thoughts and
feelings into words, those animals began to mill about, and the system
crashed. Writing in a foreign language, with all the limitations that
entailed, removed this obstacle. It also led me to discover that I could
express my thoughts and feelings with a limited set of words and
grammatical structures, as long as I combined them effectively and
linked them together in a skillful manner. To sum up, I learned that
there was no need for a lot of difficult words—I didn’t have to try to
impress people with beautiful turns of phrase.

Much later, I found out that the writer Agota Kristof had written a
number of wonderful novels in a style that had a very similar effect.
Kristof was a Hungarian who escaped to Neuchâtel, Switzerland in 1956
during the upheaval in her native country. She had learned—been forced
to learn, really—French. Yet it was through writing in that foreign
language that she succeeded in developing a style that was new and
uniquely hers. It featured a strong rhythm based on short sentences,
diction that was never roundabout but always straightforward, and
description that was apt and free of emotional baggage. Her novels were
cloaked in an air of mystery that suggested important matters hidden
beneath the surface. I remember feeling somehow or other nostalgic when
I first encountered her work. Quite incidentally, her first novel, *The
Notebook*, came out in 1986, just seven years after *Hear the Wind
Sing.*

Having discovered the curious effect of composing in a foreign language,
thereby acquiring a creative rhythm distinctly my own, I returned my
Olivetti to the closet and once more pulled out my sheaf of manuscript
paper and my fountain pen. Then I sat down and “translated” the chapter
or so that I had written in English into Japanese. Well, “transplanted”
might be more accurate, since it wasn’t a direct verbatim translation.
In the process, inevitably, a new style of Japanese emerged. The style
that would be mine. A style I myself had *discovered*. Now I get it, I
thought. This is how I should be doing it. It was a moment of true
clarity, when the scales fell from my eyes.

Some people have said, “Your work has the feel of translation.” The
precise meaning of that statement escapes me, but I think it hits the
mark in one way, and entirely misses it in another. Since the opening
passages of my first novella were, quite literally, “translated,” the
comment is not entirely wrong; yet it applies merely to the process of
writing. What I was seeking by writing first in English and then
“translating” into Japanese was no less than the creation of an
unadorned “neutral” style that would allow me freer movement. My
interest was not in creating a watered-down form of Japanese. I wanted
to deploy a type of Japanese as far removed as possible from so-called
literary language in order to write in my own natural voice. That
required desperate measures. I would go so far as to say that, at that
time, I may have regarded Japanese as no more than a functional tool.

Some of my critics saw this as a threatening affront to our national
language. Language is very tough, though, a tenacity that is backed up
by a long history. Its autonomy cannot be lost or seriously damaged
however it is treated, even if that treatment is rather rough. It is the
inherent right of all writers to experiment with the possibilities of
language in every way they can imagine—without that adventurous spirit,
nothing new can ever be born. My style in Japanese differs from
Tanizaki’s, as it does from Kawabata’s. That is only natural. After all,
I’m another guy, an independent writer named Haruki Murakami.

\* \* \* \*

It was a sunny Sunday morning in spring when I got the call from an
editor at the literary journal *Gunzo* telling me that *Hear the Wind
Sing* had been shortlisted for their new writers’ prize. Almost a year
had passed since the season opener at Jingu Stadium, and I had turned
30. It was around 11 AM, but I was still fast asleep, having worked very
late the night before. I groggily picked up the receiver, but I had no
idea at first who was on the other end or what he was trying to tell me.
To tell the truth, by that time I had quite forgotten that I had sent
off *Hear the Wind Sing* to *Gunzo*. Once I had finished the manuscript
and put it in someone else’s hands, my desire to write had altogether
subsided. Composing it had been, so to speak, an act of defiance—I had
written it very easily, just as it came to me—so the idea that it might
make the short list had never occurred to me. In fact, I had sent them
my only copy. If they hadn’t selected it, it probably would have
vanished forever. (*Gunzo* didn’t return rejected manuscripts.) Most
likely too, I would have never written another novel. Life is strange.

The editor told me that there were five finalists including me. I was
surprised, but I was also very sleepy, so the reality of what had
happened didn’t really sink in. I got out of bed, washed up, got
dressed, and went for a walk with my wife. Just when we were passing the
local elementary school, I noticed a passenger pigeon hiding in the
shrubbery. When I picked it up I saw that it seemed to have a broken
wing. A metal tag was affixed to its leg. I gathered it gently in my
hands and carried it to the closest police station, at
Aoyama-Omotesando. As I walked there along the side streets of Harajuku,
the warmth of the wounded pigeon sank into my hands. I felt it
quivering. That Sunday was bright and clear, and the trees, the
buildings, and the shop windows sparkled beautifully in the spring
sunlight.

That’s when it hit me. I was going to win the prize. And I was going to
go on to become a novelist who would enjoy some degree of success. It
was an audacious presumption, but I was sure at that moment that it
would happen. Completely sure. Not in a theoretical way but directly and
intuitively.

\* \* \* \*

I wrote *Pinball, 1973* the following year as a sequel to *Hear the Wind
Sing*. I was still running the jazz bar, which meant that *Pinball* was
also written late at night at my kitchen table. It is with love mingled
with a bit of embarrassment that I call these two works my kitchen-table
novels. It was shortly after completing *Pinball, 1973* that I made up
my mind to become a full-time writer and we sold the business. I
immediately set to work on my first full-length novel, *A Wild Sheep’s
Chase*, which I consider to be the true beginning of my career as a
novelist.

Nevertheless, these two short works played an important role in what I
have accomplished. They are totally irreplaceable, much like friends
from long ago. It seems unlikely that we will ever get together again,
but I will never forget their friendship. They were a crucial, precious
presence in my life back then. They warmed my heart, and encouraged me
on my way.

I can still remember with complete clarity the way I felt when whatever
it was came fluttering down into my hands that day 30 years ago on the
grass behind the outfield fence at Jingu Stadium; and I recall just as
clearly the warmth of the wounded pigeon I picked up in those same hands
that spring afternoon a year later, near Sendagaya Elementary School. I
always call up those sensations whenever I think about what it means to
write a novel. Such tactile memories teach me to believe in that
*something* I carry within me, and to dream of the possibilities it
offers. How wonderful it is that those sensations still reside within me
today.

 

*The Birth of My Kitchen Table Fiction: An Introduction to*
WIND/PINBALL: Two Novels

*Copyright 2015 © by Haruki Murakami.* *Translated by Ted Goossen*

[](https://lithub.com/author/haruki-murakami/)

###### [Haruki Murakami](https://lithub.com/author/haruki-murakami/)

Haruki Murakami was born in Kyoto in 1949 and now lives near Tokyo. His
work has been translated into more than 50 languages, and the most
recent of his international honors is the Hans Christian Anderson
Literature Award, whose previous recipients include J.K Rowling, Isabel
Allende, and Salman Rushdie. His forthcoming novel is *Killing
Commendatore.*

###### Previous Article

[**LitHub Daily: June 25,
2015**](https://lithub.com/lithub-daily-june-25-2015/)

###### Next Article

[**When a Bookseller Has to Sell His Own
Book**](https://lithub.com/when-a-bookseller-has-to-sell-his-own-book/)

-   -   Popular Posts
    -------------

    -   1.

        [](https://lithub.com/what-happens-when-satanists-try-to-build-a-public-monument/)

        [**What Happens When Satanists Try to Build a Public
        Monument?**](https://lithub.com/what-happens-when-satanists-try-to-build-a-public-monument/)July
        30, 2019 by [Jay Wexler](https://lithub.com/author/jaywexler/)

        [0](https://lithub.com/what-happens-when-satanists-try-to-build-a-public-monument/)

    -   2.

        [](https://lithub.com/on-the-evolution-of-fatness-in-society/)

        [**On the Evolution of Fatness in
        Society**](https://lithub.com/on-the-evolution-of-fatness-in-society/)July
        29, 2019 by [Christopher E.
        Forth](https://lithub.com/author/christophereforth/)

        [0](https://lithub.com/on-the-evolution-of-fatness-in-society/)

-   Today's Giveaway
    ----------------

    [](/todays-giveaway/)

    [Enter](/todays-giveaway/)

-   [](https://bookmarks.reviews)

    -   [](https://bookmarks.reviews/5-reviews-you-need-to-read-this-week-8-15-2019/)

        [**5 Reviews You Need to Read This Week: From the Wild West to
        the Big
        Easy**](https://bookmarks.reviews/5-reviews-you-need-to-read-this-week-8-15-2019/)August
        15, 2019

    -   [](https://bookmarks.reviews/point-counterpoint-edoardo-albinatis-the-catholic-school/)

        [**Point/Counterpoint: Edoardo Albinati's *****The****
        ****Catholic****
        ****School***](https://bookmarks.reviews/point-counterpoint-edoardo-albinatis-the-catholic-school/)August
        15, 2019 by [Book
        Marks](https://bookmarks.reviews/author/book-marks/)

    -   [](https://bookmarks.reviews/erica-wagner-on-anti-nostalgia-memoirs-and-walt-whitman-at-200/)

        [**Erica Wagner on Anti-Nostalgia Memoirs and Walt Whitman at
        200**](https://bookmarks.reviews/erica-wagner-on-anti-nostalgia-memoirs-and-walt-whitman-at-200/)August
        14, 2019 by [Book
        Marks](https://bookmarks.reviews/author/book-marks/)

    -   [](https://bookmarks.reviews/william-faulkners-1952-review-of-the-old-man-and-the-sea/)

        [**William Faulkner's 1952 Review of *****The**** ****Old****
        ****Man**** ****and**** ****the****
        ****Sea***](https://bookmarks.reviews/william-faulkners-1952-review-of-the-old-man-and-the-sea/)August
        13, 2019 by [Book
        Marks](https://bookmarks.reviews/author/book-marks/)

    -   [](https://bookmarks.reviews/five-great-memoirs-about-mixed-race-families/)

        [**Five Great Memoirs About Mixed-Race
        Families**](https://bookmarks.reviews/five-great-memoirs-about-mixed-race-families/)August
        13, 2019 by [Jane
        Ciabattari](https://bookmarks.reviews/author/janeciabattari/)

-   [](https://crimereads.com)

    -   [](https://crimereads.com/6-new-true-crime-books-to-read-this-august/)

        [**6 New True Crime Books to Read This
        August**](https://crimereads.com/6-new-true-crime-books-to-read-this-august/)August
        15, 2019 by
        [CrimeReads](https://crimereads.com/author/crimereads/)

    -   [](https://crimereads.com/the-great-boundary-breaking-women-of-fiction/)

        [**The Great Boundary-Breaking Women of
        Fiction**](https://crimereads.com/the-great-boundary-breaking-women-of-fiction/)August
        15, 2019 by [Louisa
        Treger](https://crimereads.com/author/louisatreger/)

    -   [](https://crimereads.com/the-hard-knock-nanny-life/)

        [**The Hard-Knock Nanny
        Life**](https://crimereads.com/the-hard-knock-nanny-life/)August
        15, 2019 by [Madeline
        Stevens](https://crimereads.com/author/madelinestevens/)

    -   [](https://crimereads.com/the-conspiracy-theories-around-the-death-of-brian-jones-50-years-later/)

        [**The Conspiracy Theories Around the Death of Brian Jones: 50
        Years
        Later**](https://crimereads.com/the-conspiracy-theories-around-the-death-of-brian-jones-50-years-later/)August
        15, 2019 by [William
        Shaw](https://crimereads.com/author/williamshaw/)

    -   [](https://crimereads.com/charlies-angel-squeaky-fromme/)

        [**Squeaky Fromme: Charlie's
        Angel**](https://crimereads.com/charlies-angel-squeaky-fromme/)August
        14, 2019 by [Tori
        Telfer](https://crimereads.com/author/toritelfer/)

-   -   Follow us on Twitter
    --------------------

    [My Tweets](https://twitter.com/lithub)
-   [Like us on Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/lithub)
    ------------------------------------------------------

    [Like us on Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/lithub)

