John Lutz's Slow Blog (SLOG)

John Lutz

Contact: jlutz@uvic.ca Department of History/Office of Community Based
Research University of Victoria PO 3045 Victoria, BC, V8T 2K3, Canada

Home

 Websites

 CV

 Courses

Contact

Welcome to my Slow Blog (slog)

Digital Literacy: What Every Graduate Student needs to Know. (Summer
2009)

What should the well-trained graduate student know about digital history
when they convocate? The “digital turn” has affected all aspects of
history including how we research, write, teach, communicate and publish
and its impact is only going to grow…. Recognizing that today’s
technologies are only going to be the foundation for tomorrow’s, anyone
who does not have the fundamentals today will find themselves cut off
from a growing, dynamic and increasingly important part of the
profession and it will be increasingly difficult to catch up.

Clio’s New Tools Managing Bibliographies, Zotero, and Intellectual
Transparency (Winter 2008)

Citing books, websites, photos, articles, blogs or podcasts and keeping
track of your annotations just got easier. Free and designed for
historians (and others) by historians (and others). Zotero is a
simple-to-use tool that even those who have only Recently given up their
typewriters for word processors can use with ease….It is a rare and
excellent example of what historians can do when we create tools for our
own use insteadof borrowing those designed for others.

Putting the Revolutionary into the Internet Revolution: Historians on
the Holodeck (March 2008)

What was the past like? We all want to know since our identity depends
so much on our imagination of the past. Was it dirty, colourful, smelly,
colder, nasty, and brutish but with loving extended families? Historians
are taking the first steps into a world of three dimensional (3D)
re-creations of historical places and landscapes. Is this a colossal
waste of resources or a revolutionary opportunity to do things we have
always dreamed of?

The Web Gives and It Takes Away (Fall 2007)

The Internet has been with us for over a decade so we are starting to
have the critical distance to see what elements of historical work it
has enabled and what parts it has begun to undermine. The reflection is
useful, I think, to give two types of direction. The question: “what are
the affinities between what we want to do as historians and the new
technology?”suggests how we may take advantage of it. We also need to
understand how the technology is taking advantage of us. Read more
(pdf).

Bed Jumping and Compelling Convergences in Historical Computing  (2007)

Rivers are a common metaphor for knowledge;  both are always in motion
-- undercutting the edge of the bank here, depositing material there,
 following beds carved out eons or centuries ago.   Over the past half
century important intellectual currents in three distinct fields: 
historiography, teaching, and computing have largely flowed in distinct
watersheds with only occasional attempts to link them, and with not much
more success than Baillie Grohman. In the last decade, however, some
have started to flow along parallel valleys and it is possible from
certain vantages to see the similarities and where these rivers of
thought and intellectual effort have begun to converge.Read more.

 

Preserving Our Past Essential to Our Future (2005)

What is a people or a province, without a story, without a history? A
shared story is what makes us a people: British Columbians. Alongside
are our separate stories which make us different peoples within the
larger whole: the First Nations and the mosaic of other peoples who
comprise the province. Together, these stories of our history -- tell us
who we are. Without a sense of a shared past we have no common future
and condemn ourselves to competing for the spoils.Read more.

A Heritage Policy for British Columbia (2005)

A provincial heritage policy would acknowledge the role of historic
resources as central to the culture, education system and economy in
British Columbia and to the ongoing process of settling title issues
with First Nations.Read more.

Humanities and Technology (1999)

I am going to offer a series of propositions which I believe to be true.
Six of these propositions relate to the connections between the
humanities and technology, and two to the links between technology and
teaching the humanities. These propositions were initially crafted to
fit into a ten minute presentation, and so leave lots of room for
development and evidence, but brevity has its own power.Read more.
