## 2018-12-31

The day has had many weathers from the morning to the afternoon. At morning I walk through the sun and wind and don't realize how quick I am going until I stop by through a brewery to ask for directions. I realize that with each pass from outdoors to indoors I can only feel normal temperature in each separate space only if I manage to have the proper amount of layers of clothes on. That is, very few inside, and very much outside. More accurately, when I am under a roof I can be OK with a single shirt, or maybe even be cautious against the cold and have a sweater on. Once under the sky I change for a coat with a black coat, which has the additional magnetism for sun rays, and a black cloth hat which not only protects my head but my ears as well. 

I squint through the wind to look forward and once a while through the last two days I notice that as a reflex I come to my eyes and clean some tears coming out. It is not that I am sad, nor worried, it is I believe a simple reflex on harsh conditions, and a natural bodily reflex to the air coming inside to the eyes. This has also happened to me under other conditions, such as extreme hot. I remember of this happening in Brazil chatting with my friends Camila and Pedro. And this repeated under other few situations, although I can't recall on which precise conditions. Or maybe none of these times were about biogical responses to the environment, and I was in fact un-intendedly crying, even out of happiness. I really don't know, but I like the places I've been at and with.

******

> Not Crying | Flight of the Conchords 

\[Bret\]\
I'm not crying, no, I'm not crying\
And if I am crying, it's not because of you\
It's because I'm thinking about a friend of mine\
You don't know who is dying, that's right, dying\
These aren't tears of sadness because you're leaving me\
I've just been cutting onions, I'm making a lasagna ... For one!\
Oh, I'm not crying, no\
\
\[Jemaine and Bret\]\
There's just a little bit of dust in my eye\
That's from the path that you made when you said your goodbye\
I'm not weeping 'cause you won't be here to hold my hand\
For your information, there's an inflammation in my tear gland\
I'm not upset because you left me this way\
My eyes are just a little sweaty today\
They've been looking around and are searching for you\
They've been looking for you even though I told them not to\
These aren't tears of sadness, they're tears of joy\
I'm just laughing, [ha, ha, ha, ha,
ha](//genius.com/Flight-of-the-conchords-not-crying-lyrics#note-15556024){.referent}\
