### Romina @ Waffle House / Chaltén [2019 01]

 [00:16.2] Benji: We would like to know the background of how you got over here, and how did you start off. Where did you come from? How did you choose to come over here? [ROMINA: How we chose Chaltén?] What are you doing? Did you start with this or something else? 
 [00:27.9] ROMINA: We are from Córdoba, which is in the center of the country. And we came over here because some friends of my husband, Demián, commented us about this town and that there were fiscal lands being delivered due to the bordering issue with Chile over those years. So the Santa Cruz administration generated a development project, based on touristic business. 
 [01:00.4] And we were in Córdoba studying Tourism and Hospitality. So we saw it as a chance of start developing ourselves, to begin our family, because when we met Demián already had land over here, and we decided to move over. We married in Córdoba and just a month later we came to Chaltén. And we started with our family to develop here from the ground up, from zero. 
 [01:30.3] A young married couple, we arrived here in 1988, in Chaltén. And we began with our first enterprise that we developed, which were cabins for tourism. But starting very small: just one cabin. And then the project began to grow, and we finally added this gastronomic business as a support to the cabins.
 [01:58.2] Benji: And nowadays you may perhaps have people working here, in the waffle house, such as your children?
 [02:04.3] ROMINA: Actually my children are ... We have 4. Valentina, 16; Juan Cruz, 15; Martina, 11; Sol, 8. Valentina actually helps us out with another business, which are touristic maps. Demian builds them up, and my brother does the design, who also lives in Chaltén. Because once families move over here, 
 [02:30.3] they begin to bring over the rest of the family behind. So, Valentina, helps us out with the distribution of the maps. But yes, they are family business. We all work in everything. We do have hired people, that work with us, that have already been around for years living in Chaltén, and other by season. 
 [03:00.4] Benji: And how did you begin with waffles, which perhaps is not so common in Córdoba? Perhaps you had a market or gastronomic picture beforehand. 
 [03:10.2] ROMINA: Of course. The waffle was born because when our vacations were very long, because tourism up to 5 years back, was only January and February: what happened then with the entrepreneurs from Chaltén is that we migrated to our birth cities. And upon that migration, we always we used to (before reaching Córdoba) going through to Bariloche to ski, and rest. Our vacations were in the snow. 
 [03:42.0] And Bariloche has a development on waffles, it's always had that. Because of the culture they have. So we said, it would be cool if in Chaltén we would bring over this product, and we only added it up: in the beginning we made a pilot test with ice cream and chocolate shop and we added waffles, and that ended up mutating into waffle house alone which is what worked most. We modified the initial product into what passengers where looking for.
 [04:10.8] So after a long walk they would want something quite abundant. Not only to have a snack but to have a complete meal. 
 [04:20.2] Benji: And you mention that there are some cycles that people sometimes go back to their places of origin, [hand in front of camera / Laughters] did you have a period in which you went back and forth and later on established here during a longer time?
 [04:41.0] ROMINA: In the beginning, during our first years here we always went back to Córdoba let's say some four months. Over time, the season became longer and along with that our businesses that went on developing and ending. So currently our vacation period is taking two months which we use to visit family and travel. 
 [05:11.2] But those are only two months because this fact of traveling a lot changes once your children start going to school. Our long vacation periods are in winter. So we travel during their vacation and they normally don't go to school for a month in wintertime  to travel. And in summer time we can't move away from here. 
 [05:37.2] Benji: And that time that you take to stop, is that recent that you can take only two months or has it been several years already? You mentioned some change perhaps some five years ago? 
 [05:46.0] ROMINA: It could be nearly four years that we started with this long vacation period that goes along with the development of our businesses. It was a direct relationship. During the first years, it was all about saving up a lot for money because Chaltén has one issue. Since the lands are fiscal, very cheap, but what was very expensive was to build here. 
 [06:15.3] Comparing with the rest of the country, building here at that time was up to let's say: you should pay a single brick three times more over than in Córdoba. And the same applies to manpower. Very scarce and hence, high price. So, most of those of us who have businesses we learned to build roofs, the floor foundations. The beginning of our business went along with our manual labor. 
 [06:45.3] Because at that time it was so expensive. 
 [06:47.9] Benji: Apart from the individual experience, if I could ask at a regional level, where there credits available to what you could find nowadays in Córdoba? 
 [07:04.7] ROMINA: Back then there were credits available with very low rates. But Chaltén had a problem. Since the land was fiscal, and you could only become owner with proper legal documentation, we couldn't access a big credit if you wouldn't build anything if you wouldn't go over with a property, and legal proof that would avail so to access the credit. 
 [07:32.6] So for Chaltén, I don't know about the rest of the province, but here that was a problem. We couldn't access the credit, because we didn't have that kind of proof of the land in which you were. We COULD access smaller credits which we could use once we already had something built.  
 [07:56.3] For instance, if we'd like to make the installations, it wouldn't be enough. But if we wanted money for let's say the beds, kitchen and so on, it'd be fine. For the furniture, up to there you could reach. 
 [08:11.1] Benji: Could you say regarding the timing of this progress, how at first you were migrants, and then you could consider yourself as well established?
 [08:20.0] ROMINA: Yes. Most of us, the settlers in Chaltén, just now there's a generation of people here who are our children. In our case, we have 4 children. The first two: I went to Córdoba, so that they could be born over there. The following two I rioted and they were born in Chaltén. So that generation is the population born here. The kids that are 8, 10, 15, 16 years old.
 [08:50.5] But all the rest, all of the previous we are all that have came from different provinces, countries. There are a lot of foreigners living here from back then. All the estancia pioneers are all European. And then this younger generation, in the last 35 years roughly since the foundation of the town, we are already a generation of local immigrants from our own country: Córdoba, Mendoza, Buenos Aires, cities. 
 [09:22.7] Benji: What was the challenge or obstacle that you decided to put up a riot and have your children born over here? 
 [09:31.9] ROMINA: I rioted because I reached a point in which I felt that I didn't belong to one place or another. Living in one city ... I arrived here at 22. And I could see that this town was very new and of passage, just a seasonal thing. Once the season was over, the town would disappear. So I felt that towards my children, for them it would be worse. 
 [10:00.2] Because their parents' being from Córdoba, well I should go over there to have them and come back. It would be like sense of belonging, once you already feel it's part of yourself. When you reach a point when you've lived the same amount of time between your original city and the one that you've chosen. So well, it was a sense of belonging also towards them. Because they were born here, they're Patagónicos. Despite their family ascendance comes from Córdoba, but they feel this town as their own. They begin to migrate from Chaltén to other places.
 [10:30.0] Such as when they want to go over to study, they have to move away. So I felt that we've reached a point when we should stay over here and not even going to Calafate. I rioted and I had them right here in the room/ward (salita). Very naturally. [Laughters]. 
 [10:47.9] Benji: Now a little broader question about Chaltén. There are a lot of people out of here that don't even know about Patagonia. Could you explain what it means to you, Chaltén and Patagonia? 
 [11:01.2] ROMINA: To me Chaltén, in our country, is like a little pearl. This being aside from all the great natural sites all over the country. It is a weird case, because it is like a mini city inserted inside a National Park. So all of us inhabitants we have to permanently do this work of 
 [11:31.7] recognizing that as we are inhabiting, we're invading the National Park. Because you can permanently see that when you decide to have a pet, how to take care towards the NP. Insert tourism as the one and only economic development. All the impacts that they generate towards the NP. What makes people come over here. So I think that visitors that arrives here, sees that. 
 [12:00.7] It's a small town inside the PN itself. You walk 100 meters and you're inside a forest. Beyond whatever else we provide as services. Nowadays we have everything. In the beginning, by midnight the lights would go off. You wouldn't have any fuel. You would have gas, but only in canisters (not through the pipeline). So the development happened during 10 years suddenly and we are a mini city but that we always try to  
 [12:32.4] understand that we are very related with the PN. Many newcomers, we notice, that they want everything: internet ... And this was not at all like this, and I think that they added value that Chaltén has is that it can maintain itself as wild (agreste) as possible, from now on, despite the inevitable development it will have. So that it doesn't transform into other towns as they already exist in Argentina, near national parks, such as Bariloche, Ushuaia. 
 [13:01.7] They're something else. If you speak over here with tourists coming from back in time during years and they suffer when they noticed that we paved the streets. They suffer when they see that internet has came. They suffer when they have mobile connection. Before, you came over here and you were disconnected with no choice, by obligation. And you lived a different kind of vacation. 
 [13:30.6] So I think we make a difference in that sense. It is still wild (agreste) Patagonia, with services but we always try for them to have a certain limit. To maintain that style. 
 [13:40.5] Benji: From the door of your business outwards, you could see that some services are provided, but all that happens in the background, are there recycling circuits, meaning about the challenges of being inside of the park? For instance, products that you should or shouldn't use of what people consume at the tables. How is that processed?
 [14:16.2] ROMINA: For years now already, in the last 5-6 years, we've had a problem which is that the garbage has gone over the limit. Because in Argentina, only recently we have this challenge of separating in situ and recycling. Chaltén has always been innovative in this point but with the tourism boom, it grew very exponentially and the touristic business: we didn't give companionship that policy that the town already had, as if in a estancia.
 [14:47.4] Typically they would recycle organics, non organics, how we would treat the garbage. Five years ago it all collapsed. All the garbage that was mixed up together and generated: it turned into chaos and so it was that the state along with the community to separate in origin and then place the garbage, whatever it was: glass, plastic, pet, and we achieved
 [15:20.5] a reduction in volume from November to March included which is outstanding [terrible... (Terribly good that is)]. So the old settlers were used to do this, and there is a policy, that fortunately the state is supporting this of promoting a centre for people to bring over voluntarily however much they can accumulate of residue. And now there will be a municipal and provincial initiative where all the garbage that you wouldn't separate will have a cost. 
 [15:51.0] This is something that has never happened before in Chaltén. And in this way it would change. In this way we would interpret ...  [Benji: Is this a law project or ...] It is a law project... It is a law. Consider that Chaltén is very young, it has only one year as a municipality, one year that it has had a town council, so just recently are the norms being created. But from this year on, we will begin to pay for whatever residue we generate. So the commitment will be linear: from the neighbors of course, but mainly by us, as the merchants.  
 [16:24.9] And if you're taking out a certain number of bags of garbage and you're going to pay a specific amount of money, it would be more convenient to separate in origin, take it over voluntarily, or they pick it up for you with no cost, and you would only pay for whatever you don't separate and mix up. So one finds oneself in the obligation to ... For instance for us, in the matter of composting organic food [non processed foods, not necessarily farm grown] it is plenty. So if we wouldn't have our own compost it would be brutal. 
 [16:51.9] [Benji: With or without worms?] 
 [16:54.5] ROMINA: We have WITH worms. But, there are people that have it without worms because it is so much what you generate that it becomes a lot of work of composting. But fortunately, from the state they are doing a good companionship with training, picking up your recycled garbage with no cost at least for now. So it's all about changing people to make a click. And the tourists that are coming from outside, and they already have their chip included and they separate glass, plastic.
 [17:23.4] We have to adopt this format. 
 [17:30.1] Benji: We've talked some amount of Chaltén's history. Could you tell me about the town's origins? 
 [17:35.2] ROMINA: The town begins in this area of the National Park Los Glaciares, North area, in a first moment as a centre for National Park which had a small inn, that is located where nowadays is the Information Centre. And they took care of guarding the area. In that first time they were only a few park rangers. And they already had, repeatedly, groups of expeditions, of mountain climbers, 
 [18:07.7] who would come over. Firstly because of Cerro Torre. The famous crossing of the 50s. It was a climbing that was very discussed (polemic), and they always came, mostly Italians to climb Cerro Torre. Because they didn't have any goal proof of everything that they did with their escalating achievements. And Torre was a Mecca to try themselves. 
 [18:36.3] So they arrived and they were received either by pioneer estancieros like Madsen, and other nearby estancias. And National Parks worked as host and controlled all those little movements that were being generated over those years, the 1950s. It was a very small amount of things, but still all of them foreigners. Along the years, we had the conflict with Chile. We are very close.
 [19:04.8] Benji: What was the conflict about? 
 [19:05.4] ROMINA: The controversy was about a famous roped escalation that some Italians and Austrians, which ranks as the Torre Polemic, that they arrive but aren't able to take pictures of the summit. Because the camera falls, one of the climbers passes away, but the rest gives faith that they had arrived to the top, but in the climbing world by that time it isn't believed so. 
 [19:40.3] So a huge polemic over this appeared in this first attempt to reach Torre's summit. It's quite a complicated *tower* to climb because at the end of the climbing you have an icy mushroom. So you combine what is rock climbing and ice climbing, what is the peak. So that polemic is very famous: climbers continue to come over, not only European, but from all over the world, but the click is by the year prior to 1985, which is when the town is established, because there is a conflict with Chile, 
 [20:11.1] of supposed advances from their side, and on the road to Laguna del Desierto there's a shooting and one of the Chilean carabineer dies. In that conflict by both countries is that Santa Cruz proposes to establish the town with a promotion of installing populations from all over the country, to settle a national reference in the area. Because our connection with Chile, 
 [20:43.1] at this time is only through a frontier passage that exists, which opens in November and generates a connection with a very small town from the other side, which is Villa O'Higgins. In the middle you can't find anything, just lakes, hills and forest. So with this promotion by Santa Cruz in 1985, which by decree they establish the town, a whole new policy is generated by the province to send over 35 people at that time: teachers, public services, police officers, gendarmes, a public structure which at that time was a crazy thing to do. 
 [21:29.1] Nobody understood this at all. Because it all happened so quickly. And then, if this was founded by 1985, in the 1990s a policy begins to, through newspapers and radio, comment about this town. That there was being support for development of touristic businesses, or farms.  
 [21:58.8] And how would the state help you out? Giving you fiscal lands, many at that time you could find available lands such as this one: 3000-4000 square meters, an hectare so that you could develop your business. With your commitment that you would invest in the building of your business and they would go along with the symbolic value of giving land away. What we paid, those of us who came over at that time, was very low price for land.
 [22:26.2] And then is when the development of tourism begins. But at that time the tourism was quite scarce. Argentinians wouldn't even get to know Chaltén. I remember that when I came over I knew up to Puerto Madryn and Bariloche, but from there downwards, it was really wild (agreste) Patagonia. 
 [22:46.3] Benji: You've said some amount of people coming over to stay. Could you tell us about the diversity of people who come?? 
 [22:57.3] ROMINA: As profiles you have a common factor which is that everyone that comes here has an entrepreneurial spirit. Because it's a very vertiginous town in its working rhythm when the season is ongoing. And then it's a town that when you're living during the year it dies. It looks like the wild west. People disappear. Businesses close. So you live as if in a ghost town. This generates that the group of people that we live in Chaltén,   
 [23:32.3] we are quite special. All very active. I believe. We always look for activities. Despite that we live in a remote place, far away from everything. Because the closest thing, as cities go, is Calafate. It's like that we generate activities from the town so that we don't fall short with anything that we should need. So my children have sports of any kind that you could look for: hockey indoor, basket, girl soccer, 
 [24:00.7] boy soccer, rock climbing, adventure schools, French language, German language, English language. So we ourselves, as the same inhabitants have remained alert so that it doesn't become a still place: as if we would only come over to work and nothing else. We would have our season and then we just wait for it to come back. It's a town with a life of its own. Despite tourism which is what allows these movements to happen: the working season. 
 [24:33.3] I believe that is this kind of people: entrepreneurial, that like the wind, people that don't miss the sun. [Laughters]. And people that we know that we have work to do, fortunately, that we do OK, that we can progress, and do business. Later on, when the years go by we can also travel and become tourists ourselves. We all have that profile. When we have less work, 
 [25:00.2] we become tourists and travel. A lot of people moves over to town by the time when this town was in constant construction. When the first hotels were built. And the big undertakings brought a lot of people to build and then they saw it as a chance to develop. And that was a good thing as well. Because people from other countries, or other cities from Argentina came as builders, craftsmen, 
 [25:31.2] carpenters, and they managed to stay over, and then develop their own touristic businesses. Some kept on with building and others didn't. And they're truly well, happy, living OK, loving the town. 
 [25:47.7] Benji: And the tourists? 
 [25:48.3] ROMINA: And the tourists I believe that our major segment has always been the international kind. It was first the world that got to know about us, and then the Argentinian. We are to the local tourism like an annex to Calafate. Calafate has bet very much for many years in the promoting of Calafate. And we added up as an annex, since they promote us very much as a day trip. 
 [26:20.9] So if you come one day over. And at a first time it was striking that the town opposed this: What do you mean by full day Chaltén? Our destiny entails so many more days. And along time, that visitor who came over for a day ended up coming back a lot of days. So, thank you Calafate: they did a huge promotion because when you arrive to Chaltén and you actually realize that it deserves more days because you always have this climate: a lot of wind, rain, some sunny days; so you need several days for all the trails you can take over. 
 [26:58.8] And considering that this part of the National Park is freely available. You don't pay for an access to Park. So the tourist is distended, awaits for good climate to walk. So you need more than a single day. I believe that right now in Argentina they began to know about us and understand that they can come over for several days. You do need to be a tourist that enjoys walking and accept that Patagonia is like this. A wild (salvaje) climate. A lot of wind. And I believe that right now, the Argentinian is
 [27:30.3] beginning to know us. 
 [27:38.9] Phil: Can you tell us a little more about the wind? It's really hard to describe the wind with the camera, can you tell us some stories about powerful winds and how you manage to live with it.
 [27:56.0] ROMINA: Yes. Plenty. [In English by ROMINA: I think that if you don't like the wind you must go.] [Laughters]. [ENGLISH: Many couples: the lady didn't like the wind and ran away.] [More Laughters]. [English: It's a problem. But ... Goes on in Spanish] For example, the winds are extreme. We've got to the point of having winds that have shifted houses from one place to another. [English: Some little houses, have moved from one place in the morning to the other. Yeah.]
 [28:25.3] [And all the town just go to keep the house there.] [Spanish: Sí!] Roofs, [on the days that the wind is very strong, and you must have a look on your roof. Then all the town, on this roof keeping out [?] All the time.] It's very strong, and it's a factor which has always existed. They would always tell you: to live in Chaltén you have to like wind.
 [28:55.6] Or you can't be affected by the wind. Because those of us who live here notice that the very windy days: [we note that the tourists that don't like the wind is terrible.] Terrible!! The zest, nerves, anger, and it's the wind [says with surprise and wonder]!!! We say: welcome to the land of wind. 
 [29:25.2] Our children live with the wind. You go out and it's the wind. You walk with wind. There are no hairdressers, well one. But you can't comb your hair because of the wind. And it's an extreme wind. Always. The whole year. There are very few the days that are without wind, and then we praise to the Pachamama. [Laughters] 
 [29:55.5] Benji: You mentioned about a general spirit of activities, of what people like to do, the ones that are established here. Would you say that there is any kind of communal spirit? 
 [30:11.0] ROMINA: I believe so. Yes. There is a communal spirit but we think there isn't. It's been 20 years that I've been living here and I believe that we all think that there isn't a communal spirit. This saying of: small town, big hell. A small community generates that we all know each other. So a conflict that wouldn't be a conflict in a city because there's so many people and so many bigger and more serious conflicts, 
 [30:40.8] over here a small conflict is a very big conflict. So it produces all these series of frictions and fights of settlers that we've known each other for such a long amount of years. But I believe that there is effectively a sense of community because when the town had to revolt for any kind of specific issue, such as residues, works that are down communally, the town has united and we have all participated,
 [31:12.0] beyond the fact that you may speak with one and not with another, at those times we all participate. You can notice in the massive activities that our children do. So there IS a sense of community and belonging. We live in a small town. So it's part of that kind of folklore of having a rhythm of a small town. This thing of knowing each other with everyone. The teacher is a neighbor, your neighbor is your client [smiles]. We're very few. 
 [31:40.6] Benji: You mention massive activities, and on another hand you mentioned the wind. Are there any things that you do out of season outdoors? And this being with all participating together with the wind to confront upon? 
 [32:07.1] ROMINA: No. Everything outdoors that we do, such as climbing, go for a stroll, do crossings: we do them. Yes, one thing that we can't do ... For instance, those who play soccer: you can't dream over here to be professional player. [Phil laughs and Romina too] For example, my son is now going to Córdoba, and wants to play soccer. But not in Chaltén, so he migrates. 
 [32:37.3] Over here you can play soccer inside the gym. Otherwise, the ball just flies away. No. Impossible. But for instance, indoor hockey, because outdoor is out of the picture. All outdoor is related with walking, climbing, people who live here is already used to climbing with wind, no problem. And the activities done in summer, like fishing,  
 [33:07.0] camping, some lake activities that are done but suspended if there's too much wind, almost all the time. Sailing when the wind is strong is impossible. But everything else as sport teams is indoor. We're already used to this working this way. There's no other way. 
 [33:32.3] Benji: and regarding the different possible activities outside, you mention lake activities, if you want to do trekking: how do you measure if it's OK to go out or not? Or do you just go out in any wind condition?
 [33:45.9] ROMINA: Going out is under any wind condition. With the exception when tourists are alerted when they arrive. In Chaltén you have the four climates, the four seasons, in a single day. We can be just like this, and suddenly the wind stops, the sun comes up, heat, so what do well tell to visitors? This is extreme [far end, ultimate] Patagonia. So they come over to walk to a place where THIS is the ideal weather. It would be a blessing if it were to change,
 [34:16.3] to a better, sunny, but with mild clouds, calm. So that you could walk easily. So, what is recommended is to go out. And you should take caution in the higher places, since you're going to be more exposed. Well, with the weather forecast we could check and you could reach up to a base camp. You can measure this and come back. But the assumption is that you can go out. There have been tourists that have needed to sit down to move forward. And they come back totally fascinated. "Oh! The wind!!! We thought we would fly away." And it's like a magnet feature. 
 [34:48.2] The wind became an extreme alluring icon. [Benji: You've got no other choice.] [ROMINA: You've got no other choice!]
 [34:54.9] Benji: We spoke about all the support for business, by the state and so. Are there any kind of obstacles, be them structural, financial, unforeseen situations that has made it hard to develop? Maybe you've had ups and downs. 
 [35:15.7] ROMINA: No, such as hardship what most of us that came in the beginning we didn't come over ... We weren't business people that were already bringing money. No kind of capital to develop. So the obstacles were that the money that you could gain working in Chaltén for others who already had some kind of business, it was made it possible for you to develop. So at the time we saw this as a deterrence of not having an inceptive capital to invest from the start but it was also something
 [35:56.6] attractive for families which we were mostly young and we could live on that. So this would mean to go on at full capacity (a todo pulmón) and gave it all a certain flavor, which perhaps arriving with capital, have your hotel, have cabins, have a bar/restaurant ... We saw this all as a positive thing, which was to give value to everything that the town was capable of. And it was a genuine income,
 [36:24.6] that returned from what we were investing. So our investment went along, beforehand, with our own work. We started working with other partners, that today are partners. But for what we worked at the beginning it was related to the first travel agencies, the first hostels, the first means of transportation, which were already in town, and were very few. You could spare some fingers from your both hands if you were to count at that time. And those of us who came over then were working for them. And that money was what allowed us to save it and re invest that into our lands. To me that had a great ["terrible"] added value,
 [37:00.2] which is the lesson that we could pass on to our children who now live a different situation. 
 [37:08.6] [Benji: terrible meaning for them "fantastic"] [ROMINA: Of course!!] 
 [37:12.4] [Benji: So the balance is] ROMINA: Highly positive!! Because we always remind them that this wasn't just done [snap] with some money that was in a safe, in a bank account. Our families from home did help out a lot, because from Córdoba they noticed what was going on here, with the wind. By that time there weren't a lot of supermarkets. You couldn't find any vegetables. There were no place where to buy. You had to travel. We used to have a gravel road, so arriving to Calafate meant a 6 hour trip. 
 [37:41.6] So our families, all the way from there, our parents used to send us supermarket groceries: "hoping that our children are doing well" [mimics crying]. That is inserted in our family history, and I think it made us to be a united family, well established. We give value to a lot of things, despite that we can enjoy nowadays because we are already noticing the gains [frutos]. Today we are able to travel, we can share with them other things, which
 [38:10.3] at that time, if we were a 20 year couple already with children, it would have been quite hard to begin with. We came alone and well, and that's how it began. Putting the body in during plenty hours a day. When we weren't working, we worked on the land. We built up the floor together, because Demián's brother is an architect, so we would tell him "we don't have enough to pay the workforce, tell us how to make the floor ourselves" and there we went to do it. 
 [38:42.3] [Blender] And those are added values which when the tourist comes over they have no idea. But one can say, "well, that is what one ..." It's something that's there, but tacit. 
 [38:51.4] Benji: Could you do the floor with the two of you, or did you need some more people? 
 [38:53.3] ROMINA: No. We did it just the two of us, because the first cabins were small. Later on we went making it all bigger. So we made them together, the two of us. It was either buying the material and do it ourselves, or not doing anything at all. "Nooo", we said, "let's do it, come on, we're young, we can do it." Demián did all the roofs, of all of our the businesses. He studied Tourism and Hospitality, but at the time he was a carpenter's assistant. Because it was a matter of doing anything you could have handy [changa: informal labor]. 
 [39:20.3] Or any kind of little job that would appear, we would do it. So since he was carpenter's assistant, you learned the craft. And he did it. So that is the added value. So he looks up and notices that he made it. And that's very good. 
 [39:37.8] Benji: That actually shows another side of the wild world, I can relate that one feels that as a normal thing. Now a broader question. People can understand Patagonia as a wild place (salvaje), would you see it in this way, or differently, what would you like to say about this? What do you think? 
 [40:00.1] ROMINA: I believe so. That it still is a wild place (salvaje). Because it has a lot of condiments that haven't been lost. We are like a little development inside of that wild Patagonia. But if you walk 300 meters away in one direction or another you realize that it is still the Patagonia from the 1950s, that those early pioneer met. We've generated a mega development in a town that is only 120 hectares. 
 [40:30.2] But if you go away 300 metres, or 18 kilometres into a countryside, and you say "no, I'm not in Chaltén, this is a totally virgin place." This National Park has quite a narrowed down circuit for trekking which make it possible to do a seven day hike, but in a very short and controlled space. If you move outside that area, of places that are rural/rough (agreste), and through which you can access but with a guide, or with some assistance, and they are totally savage and with no transit. 
 [41:05.4] We have provincial reserves, which aren't part of National Parks, towards Lago del Desierto, which are totally rural (agreste). So I think the WE are, yes, inserted in Wild Patagonia. Despite the touristic services that we all have in Chaltén. In 35 years we achieved a touristic tier that has everything to offer but you move just a bit away and in the forest, and in the countryside, you can experience the Wild Savage Patagonia. Certainly!!
 [41:31.5] Phil: Is the wind wild? 
 [41:40.2] ROMINA: The wind IS wild! YES!!! The wind is like a DEVIL here!!! [DEMONY!] Totally damned!! There are people who can stand it. There's people that have left Chaltén because of the wind. Because you can see these flags, they're here one day and they fly away. So the kids that work here already know that due to the wind, if you'd like to have flags you have to be willing to run after them. 
 [42:09.8] I believe that the wind is the major point to take into consideration in this town. For instance, Calafate DOESN'T have this kind of wind. The tourists come over from Calafate, and Chaltén flies, and over there it's just the sun, birdies, butterflies. Over here you can't find a butterfly. Because poor butterfly it would fly away. So over here the wind is a factor that the tourist that comes over says "wind!" You arrived to the land of the wind. 
 [42:43.5] If you notice, there are businesses that are called "the winds gathers us", they're several that relate to the wind because it's a factor that stands out and you need to accept it as soon as you arrive and intend to stay. 
 [43:01.3] Benji: What does "el viento los amontona" have, because it's the first you mentioned?
 [43:04.7] ROMINA: That's a girl from Córdoba, an architect, who came over to work in one of the first pizza places in Chaltén, and then she made her own souvenir house. It's right around here on the main street. Now she's working with a friend of her, also from Córdoba. The concept is that we're all gathered up here as similar people between us. Special people.  
 [43:32.7] To live a great deal of years over here. 
 [43:36.4] Benji: About Patagonia, reaching now some closure, I'm not sure if we as Argentinians have the idea of Patagonia. We normally just say the South. Do you think that over here, or in general, there's a Patagonia concept? If so, what's it about?
 [44:05.5] ROMINA: Us Argentinians, we have a concept ... ? I, Romina, I began to assimilate the idea of Patagonia because of my relationship with the tourists that came from abroad. I DID NOT have a concept at all for Patagonia. No. It's a bit like that the foreigner gave me that concept, of Patagonia. That far away place, that is attractive, and is liked, and that they value so much. Notice how many brands, very well known, 
 [44:36.5] from a respectful point of view, I believe. Because the relationship between those people and this land is of total respect, to value, and take care of. I think that the Argentinian doesn't, no. But those of us who live in these places, the foreigner themselves go on delivering us that concept, that we take in and say "yeah! we're here! In a unique place, to take care of, very valuable". And now I believe that the Argentinian tourist, ourselves, from our working place demanding it to be respected, 
 [45:11.7] That if they come over they should take care of the place, that they SHOULD VALUE. That coming over to Patagonia is really ... There are tourists that have to save a lot of years of their life to reach these places. And for an Argentinian to have the accessibility to reach over here they have to see that as a highly valuable thing. Take care, enjoy, promote correctly. So I think we're in that process. But I think that naturally we didn't use to have that concept for Patagonia.
 [45:39.0] Because abroad they say "Patagonia: uh!" We've traveled now quite a bit and when we arrive some place and we say that we live in Patagonia. "Where?" Chaltén! Fitz Roy: "uuuuhhhh". Everyone knows about it. 
 [45:55.3] Benji: When you travel, do you visit places that are not related at all, to New York, or how do you choose, is there a relationship between living here and where you chose to visit? 
 [46:06.9] ROMINA: Yes... We've started to chose what we don't have here. That is sea and sun. [Benji: Got it] So when we travel we try to go to countries that are in summer. So we only travel with bikini, and sunga, and we go out. [Laughter]. So we've gone a lot to Brazil, we got to visit Greece, I don't know if there's any Greek ancestor but we LOVE Greece! We've traveled with a lot of friends from town
 [46:38.2] with whom we all travel together, and we rent big houses and we enjoy the sun in community. And then we travel and visit friends that are living abroad. Córdoba is always a visit, but we get there in winter too. But in these years we've tried to look for places that are different to ours. So that the kids can get to know something else. To give them, considering that we live in such a small community, that they have the chance to  
 [47:08.1] get to know these places. We were raised in Córdoba, a city, I did an international exchange to study abroad, Demián has also travel a lot. [Benji: Where to?] I went to Tazmania Island, South Australia, for a year. So we are little dog feet. [Benji: And Demián?] And he started to travel after we arrived here. At one point he was about to go to live to Italy, then he didn't, and he ended in Chaltén. 
 [47:38.4] And then he acquired the taste for traveling. But we try to ... We like Brazil a lot. The North. To rest assured with heat when we can travel, which is in our winter. Then we have a lot of friends who live in Italy or family in Spain . So we go over and visit, and make a mixed family. We try to spend in traveling. We think that is our major saving, as long as it's possible. 
 [48:09.0] Benji: Now to finish, you've told us a bit about Chaltén, could you make some kind of evaluation, or prognosis for the future of the town? 
 [48:19.0] ROMINA: I could tell you how I imagine ... That we are reaching our peak performance. That's what I'd like to think. Just now we're under a discussion about many people that come over to work for the season, they've tried to stay in Chaltén, and now there's a serious problem which is the lack of lands, fiscal lands. They're over. They're some remnant lands,
 [48:50.6] but don't have anything built. So we're in a debate as a town as if it should grow or not. If National Parks has to give another 130 hectares so that this town grows up to the double. So as a town that discussion is going to be a huge challenge. Because their is a lot of need for people that live by the rent and haven't been able to access any land, but yet at the same time we say that 
 [49:20.8] the town's going to transform, duplicating it's population. Duplicating the amount of tourism. Is it a convenient thing that this happens in Chaltén? Just a few kilometres away? Would it be best that it should be some bit further away? A close by town... That would live out from this natural resource ... But will Chaltén continue to be the same? I believe that that discussion will be interesting, there will be varied positions, but Chaltén will remain the same. As it is today.   
 [49:50.0] Perhaps there could be a development nearby but at a distance of no less than 20 kilometres, that would already be another town, with other features. That would live out from this resource. But this wouldn't grow in size. Because I believe that part of the appeal of the little town is that it is a mini town inserted in the National Park. With the invasion that we are generating now as a city to the National Park, I see it quite harmful that this becomes bigger... 
 [50:20.3] That natural reserves would be taken, with a prevision that they should remain as are, with an invasion of our own development. At it's time it was cool, we were fortunate to arrive at a time that they would tell you: "how many land do you want? 3000 metres, an hectare, how much?" Now the situation has changed and it's like there's an over population. So I believe that duplicating the town would be harmful in a certain way. 
 [50:50.9] Benji: I'm under the impression that there's a micro climate socially and geographically... I've been told that there are a lot of guides that instead of living in town are living in a separate place. Is this so? How does that work? In campsites? 
 [51:14.8] ROMINA: Yes. Most of them live in campsites. Because the problem for the last 3 or 4 years is on the habitat type. Since it gives so much money to rent your property by day, then with all these new portal, like booking, airbnb, for everyone it is more convenient to rent it to the tourists. You already know that from October to April you can have it available. What happened? 
 [51:42.5] All the people that we need, migrant seasonal workers, that arrive by October to work: they don't have where to live. At a time, National Parks had campsites that were rural and free that ended up being canceled because since it was such a boom of people that came over to work, they looked like mini populations of guides. It lost the concept of rural campsite, for the tourist, and they got closed. And the only remaining campsites in town are those that are for rent,
 [52:12.1] and they're private owned. Many guides live there, because the problem is that they're charging a single room house 20.000 pesos per month (nearly 500 dollars). There's no salary for these kind of jobs that could afford that monthly cost. And nonetheless, people rent their homes because these portals allow so. So we're in a transition of a big problematic habitat situation. 
 [52:40.9] We need people to come over to work, but they don't have where to live. So they may have commented that. Now we're going to see, because municipality understood this situation and they are trying to regulate properties that are for rental, that people shouldn't go crazy, that they should put proper prices to what is possible, but I wouldn't think that this would be solved by this season, but rather in the following. 
 [53:13.7] Would you like to add something else? 
 [53:18.2] ROMINA: No. 
 [53:23.9] Phil: We typically do an hour, we know that you're busy. We really appreciate!! 
