[Pedro - lav.WAV](#pedro---lav.wav)

Pedro - lav.WAV
===============

**Start** \[00:29\] 

**End** \[40:38.7\] 

### Pedro Svarka @ Glaciarium / Calafate [2019 01]

**Interviewer:** 00:29 Could you please tell us who you are and what you do?

**PEDRO:** I wish I would knew who I am. But, my name is Pedro Svarka. I am a glaciologist. And what I am doing now: I am retired. I am 75 years old, but young in spirit. So I am still active, and even despite X I am still doing what I can do
[01:01.1] because I can't walk too much but if I can organize and I am still trying to do what should be done here, and what people are not interested in doing.  
 **Interviewer:** Thank you. [Switch Chairs for setting]
[01:41.4] The one reason why we're here is to understand and to experience and to learn about Los Glaciares National Park. Which is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Can you tell me what is the value, UNESCO calls it an "outstanding universal value", what is the outstanding universal value of the glaciers in  relation to UNESCO sites?
**PEDRO:**  [02:19.6] That is, you should ask UNESCO [Laughter]. 
**Interviewer:** I am asking an expert in glaciers. 
**PEDRO:** Well, this is one of the few places in the world where you still have ice except in Antarctica, and Greenland and other glaciers. But here is one of the very unique places in the world where you still don't have much contamination, or where tourism has
[02:48.4] not influenced as much as in many other places in Earth, like in Himalayas, the Alps, or Alaska. You have probably observed that you here you have glaciers where you can access by boats and by road, but there are very few places ... Of course this is growing too ... The boats tourism, 
[03:20.7] they are going into the branches and in front of the glaciers or close to the glaciers, but otherwise you have quite a lot of protected areas where there is no influence of human beings and as you may probably read now [X?] is seen in the Chaltén area, walking in the trails of the tourists. So, 
[03:48.6] it means that somehow places are being [covered?] because before there were animals, there were more sheep, and so on. And on of the things that I think that UNESCO has selected this place is because at least what concerns the glaciers, the Glaciar Perito Moreno is the only one, it is very unique one in the world because it's the only one
[04:13.1] that produces damning, not periodically but, so ... For a while it is not cyclic. It comes by years, or two years or four or six or sixteen and so on. Even if not so regularly recorded. So this damning and the rupture, the break event of the natural ice damn 
 [04:47.4] is really a unique, spectacular phenomenon in the world. There is no other at all, no other one. And for instance there is another hovering glacier in Alaska but it is [damped?]. It means that it is calving into sea water. 
 [05:12.0] Or ocean, or whatever, into the fjords. And then it's happened twice until now, as far as I remember. So no people could see it now. When you have seen this event which I have seen for the first time in 2016 during all 48 hours, when it is taking place there 
 [05:37.8] the rupture of the ice damn, until it finally collapses. So this is ... You must see it to be amazed or admired of this nature. So, I think this is one of the reasons which may make UNESCO consider this as a heritage site.
**Interviewer:** Thank you for that. Now, we are dealing with people who are probably going to be viewing the images that we have taken and the  images will show different glaciers. 
[06:10.3] Can you tell us how many distinct glaciers there are in the Park?  
**PEDRO:**  [06:21.9] Well, first of all I don't take much of the ... I will consider the glaciers of the whole area, of the whole South Patagonian Ice Fields. In the area of the National Parks, there are basically (I should not make it X), the difference between our glaciers and others is that these are calving in a lake, and they're so called fresh water calving glaciers. 
 [06:48.3] You may not be used to this because in the North, in Canada, they are not so many, or in Alaska for instance. They are mainly calving into the fjords or in the sea. And they are called tide water calving, because they are influenced by the tides, you know? Well, there are many different ones, here you also have non calving glaciers, but the major glaciers, the big glaciers 
 [07:19.1] like Upsala, Viedma, or (I am going North to South) which needs to be called by the local name, you know? Then you have Glaciar Upsala, the second in size, comparing to Viedma. Then we have Glaciar Moreno. In between them is the Glaciar Spegazzini, which you have probably seen a few days ago. And other smaller glaciers. 
 [07:47.0] We also have different types of glaciers, like wall glaciers, hanging glaciers, there are different ... There's a glossary of glaciers, the different names of the glaciers. But the most typical glaciers here are the fresh water calving glaciers, which are the largest and it's very important because there are not so many in the world. I don't know how many there are of this size. And they are very poorly studied. 
 [08:15.8] Tide water glaciers are studied because they are in the Northern hemisphere, or in Antarctica the big ones too. And they have more money investment to study these glaciers. Unfortunately here, there is very little investment of the State. First of all, the local municipality, and second the Province of Santa Cruz, and third of the state investment
 [08:46.0] it's really incredible that this size and beauty and importance of glaciers as a fresh water resource or whatever, or for tourist resources, the scientific point of view, because glaciers are one of the best indicators of climate change. It is not so simple. These are the glaciers which are terminus on land. 
 [09:16.5] Which you can approach and walk without going by boat. They are directly linked to the climate, read in different X: X, dilation, ablation, but the glaciers which are calving into the water, be they into sea water or fresh water, they are also influenced by the water. Changing the water's physical parameters. 
 [09:46.1] And this is what we are studying now. And this is very difficult to study: the calving process, because what does the calving depend on? They depend on many many factors, but the calving also depends on the dynamics of the glaciers and the water. Because a big part of the glacier is influenced by the water. And so water has a lot to ... It's very important effect on the glacier dynamics. 
 **Interviewer:** [10:15.3] So I would like to learn a bit more about what you're doing now. But I have to ask you a formal question first. You mentioned size, but can you be more specific? For example, Glacier Perito Moreno, how large is it?  
**PEDRO:** [10:31.7] Well, large you mean in the area? It's roughly 265 square kilometers, in area. And this doesn't change much because it's stable. Other glaciers are receding fast. And like Upsala and Viedma started to recede a few years ago very fast. And it is also that we are learning why.  
 [11:00.0] This is what also was very important how we learned from the Antarctic experience by the ice shift collapses.  But going back to the size of the Glacier Moreno: it is stable, or relatively stable, because the glacier is neither retreating nor advancing. The Glacier Upsala is 
 [11:30.0] very fast or rapidly retreating, but it is now again in a stable phase. So because it is always calving, but it is not retreating. I mean, you have calving through the year because you can see the icebergs right in front of the Glaciarium in the lake, in front of Calafate town. So this is very important. The glacier always calves but it's retreating, and it depends a lot  
 [12:00.6] specially on the depth of the lake. And there are obstacles in the lake, like moraines and so on. Because the glacier is touching at certain point but there are either islands or moraines, sub water moraines. And then the glacier is pressing, and there is this thing there, but due to reduce of back stress, because if I push you and I keep pushing you at certain moment, 
 [12:30.1] if this obstacle you move away the glacier stretches, thins and breaks. And this is very important. And this happens when the glacier is entering ... First of all [x] it detaches from the islands or from the moraine, and then it accelerates. 
 [12:58.3] It's thinning and it's breaking. And this is, for instance Upsala is thinning rapidly, [x] up to 20 meters per year. Jorge Monty, the Northern [x] Tight Water Glacier, on the Chilean part, is the most Northern glacier of the Southern Patagonian Ice Field. You are always focusing on the Parque Nacional Los Glaciares. But it is a good given example. And Upsala is the second one in the velocity of the thinning rate. 
 **Interviewer:** [13:36.4] How is climate change impacted the glaciers?
**PEDRO:**  [13:55.4] [laughter] I know that you know but it is not ... You might be surprised. As I said, first of all, I disagree with many climatologists because *What is Climate?* You know how the warning is produced for instance? Well, I guess that you don't know so, basically you want me to tell that [laughter]. 
 [14:25.7] There are roughly, what NASA says, we are all the time more and more warm, global warming. But global means that you have to have stations certified by the World Meteorological Organization in different parts of the world. Now they have roughly about over 6000, 6300 all around the world, which have been numbered, like in Calafate Airport two. 
 [15:00.2] But there are no stations in the region of the glaciers. So, if I tell you that the temperature in Calafate is 3º colder than in Moreno, you'll not believe me. But, Glaciar Perito Moreno is influenced by an inner climate. And here we have a deserting climate, in Calafate. Precipitations per year is dry. You have seen today it has rained a little bit. Roughly it's in average 200 Millimeters per year.
 [15:30.6]  And when you enter today to the park, you enter the park and you immediately see trees. So there is very few places in the world that you see such a dramatic drop of precipitation in such a short distance. To give you an idea, on the top of the ice fields, on the top of the Parque Nacional Los Glaciares glaciers it is roughly 
 [15:59.0] the plateau would be at 1600 meters above the sea level, they have roughly 8000 Millimetres per year. And in Moreno we have roughly 1500 Millimetres per year, and here we have at the entrance of the Park 200 mm! 
 [16:32.0] It's one of the most dramatic precipitations gradient in the world. There way be some other with more but this is one of the most dramatic. So, the importance is that there are no stations, they are just installing stations now, very recently. But to talk about climate you have to have 30 years of meteorological observations. And then you can talk about climate.  
 [16:59.7] So, there are no, according to my observations, or my measurements, we have a station installed by colleagues in Austria, at Moreno Glacier which is running without interruption already for 23 years. So we have still to wait 7 years: I hope I can to see this. But until now, I can say that there is no warming trend in this part of the region. 
 [17:30.3] At least during this last period. Because I compared with Calafate's station and I see there is the mean [x] temperature is almost constant throughout the years. So there's very very slight variations in 0.2 degrees Centigrade which is within accuracy of instrumental measurements. So what I say, OK, the global warming exists but here we have a region. 
 [17:59.0] It's a regional climate. We don't have stations spread uniformly around the world, of the globe. There are also stations in Antarctica and of course the data which you are taking into account also consider the Antarctic stations, which have more than 30 years. So,
 [18:27.2] they even calculate the algorithms for extent and so on. For Patagonia there are stations along the route 40, in Calafate, another one is in [X], another in Perito Moreno Town. So there are not long term stations. So in this part it is more important the dynamic loss of mass, due to dynamic factors. It's the adjustment of the glaciers to the dynamics.  
 [19:01.1] As I told you recently, the glacier accelerates due to some topographic features, they disconnect, and then accelerate and then they retreat and they loose mass. It is not due to climate, it is partly due to climate. But as I say, in order to [x] that these glaciers are affected by the global warming, I don't see this. 
 [19:31.2] Like in the Antarctic Peninsula, you have a very warm area, which is Peninsula Antarctica. And the rest of Antarctica it's not warming, it's even cooling! 
 **Interviewer:** [19:44.3] I was curious about climate change because often we go to places that are believed to be free of human impact. You yourself said this glacier is free of human impact. But typically there are not free of climate change, anthropogenic climate change impact. So in this case, you have no data to say that there is. So my question for you is: is it truly the case that this is one of the few places in the world 
 [20:16.1] that are truly free of human impact? 
**PEDRO:**  [20:19.3] No. There are not truly free because if you look at the numbers every year there are more tourists. I don't know if you compare to other places in the world. So I cannot say. It's still... First of all you have one effect which is important, which is the wind, you know? The tourism is concentrating into very ... They find already very selected places. You go to Chaltén...
 [20:54.8] It's increasing hardly. But still not comparable if you go to the glaciers of Alaska or to the glaciers of the Alps, or The Himalayas. This is the problem of rubbish. It's really incredible. The rubbish of the expeditions. They are really serious problems. Also here, they are some concerns about: there are more and more traverses along the ice fields.
 [21:27.8] And people have to take care of the waste. And this is of big concern. This is still, in my opinion, at much smaller scale. Not like in the scale of the tourism in the Alps. I don't know the numbers ... I know that in Peru, in the Peruvian Andes there is a lot of tourists too, much more than here maybe. I don't know the numbers. But here the places are very very well defined.
 [22:01.6] You have all the lake. Very few people stay in the western part of Lago Argentino. There are no people staying in the Moreno Glacier. The only hotel which was there is not habitated anymore. It's not working. We hope that it will stay like this. But it's only hope. 
 **Interviewer:** [22:28.1] So North from where I live, in the Yukon in Alaska, the [x] Santaolalla Mountains, the glaciers, there is no tourism. Almost zero. But, they have found evidence of, in the past, human habitation. So, has there ever been evidence here of human use or habitation? Even temporary?  In the glaciers.
**PEDRO:**  [22:54.5] No. As far as I know: not. But they found of course... Anthropologists have found in the region of Calafate. They are Indian paintings in the Southern branch of Lago Argentino [Brazo Sur]. If you go to Lago Roca there have seen several thousand years. But not like on the Western coast, in the fjords, 
 [23:29.0] where they have been living very closely to the glaciers. Yaghans, or other tribes. Local Southern hemisphere tribes.
 **Interviewer:** [23:39.6] So, in English we have a word that cannot be translated easily in Spanish. In English it's wilderness. My question for you is: the glaciers that we were talking about, are they a wilderness? In the true sense of the English word. 
**PEDRO:**  [23:56.7] Yeah, but explain to me the true sense of the word. 
 **Interviewer:** [24:00.5] Uninhabited, unused, untouched, pristine ...
**PEDRO:**  [24:04.8] Pristine not so much. In the glaciers there are people walking. For instance, in the Antarctica to be pristine [x] they had decided, the scientific antarctic research committee, there are areas where it wasn't allowed to fly over. So, what is pristine? It is wilderness. It is to a certain extent because now, at this time of the afternoon, there are very few people staying in the parks. In front of the glacier almost none, only park rangers [guardaparques]. 
 [24:47.3] Well, also one problem is the pristine, or wilderness, because there are many wild calves still staying within the park. And this is a big problem. Because they were imported. They are not originary. Because a hundred years ago there were farms here, closer to the glacier. Not very close. But in the Southern part, specially in the area of Lago Roca, of course the animals ... I don't know how they ... Well, there were some also in the North part of Moreno. And horses too. 
 [25:18.8] Because somebody brought horses and they left them there, so this is also not pristine. I mean, pristine here is the puma ... I mean wilderness. A local is the condor, eagles ... But not calves, no horses. So, I mean human began ... I mean, you have in one farm which is Estancia Cristina which is very close to the glacier. Well, now it is not so close because the glacier is retreating [Upsala] very fast. 
 [25:53.5] But they are still close. You can go walking several hours there on the glacier. But there are only very few people, four cottages. People sleep there in summer, tourists, visitors. This is a very complicated question. I have been in Alaska in the National Park. I went close to Mount ... Close in the valley. 
 [26:22.1] Mount McKinley. I couldn't fly over McKinley unfortunately. I wanted. But the people are flying with the plane and landing and leaving: climbers and so on. I know in what area. When I was in Yakutat we charted a small plane and we flew on the [x] and other glaciers. [x] and I don't know which more. Which was very interesting. But they're flying many small planes around. 
 [26:51.4] Here it is not allowed to fly. I mean, planes fly but very high. 
**Interviewer:** You're right. It's a very complicated question. And as you may have imagined, it's one that means a lot to me because I've spent the last four years of my research trying to understand if wilderness even exists. 
**PEDRO:**  [27:13.1] Well, me too. I think that it may be in Antarctica. I don't believe there would be any Northern part, which is in Arctic. Antarctica maybe because they are already very much concerned. Why? Because the scientists try to get areas where there is no pollution because the ice cores are the most clear evidence of the human or anthropogenic impact. 
 [27:49.6] If you ask me, I know there are scientists which do not believe, they say that it is cyclic and so on. But in my opinion it is very very very clearly demonstrated from the Antarctic ice core, the deep ice core, which you've seen the graph here from the Epica, which is an excel available to everybody, that you went to 800.000 years backwards and they found on average 280 parts per million per volume, in the samples until 1850.  
 [28:20.3] And since then it started to increase after the industrial revolution, and slightly increasing and then after the 2nd World War, when the car industry began to grow and grow, and increasing amazingly. Now we are over 400, parts per volume per million. But that is more clear because in the bubble it's everything. It's CO2, Nitrogen, 
 [28:51.7] two other ... Methane, which are clear evidence of contamination from different sources. There is no doubt about that. But even the scientists don't believe this. 
**Interviewer:** So you said half in hour, and I want to keep my promise. It's 29 minutes. I have one more question for you. And this is probably the most difficult. Because it's personal. 
 [29:23.9] You know these glaciers probably more than anyone. Why do you care? What is it that you are passionate about? 
**PEDRO:** Well, first of all, I am not the one that knows more about: I'll correct you. I am the one who has been working most ON the glaciers until some years ago. And because today there is not a lot of information from the satellites
 [29:51.0] but you must have the ground to [x]. But today I can hardly keep on reading on what they are producing, the people on the computer, with the satellite data anyway. But the question is why. Because I always remember I am geophysicist and geologist by my career or background, I'm not a doctor. So I'm not a PhD, I'm an engineer. I'm more pragmatic. 
 [30:20.4] I have learned a lot from very important glaciologists. I was very lucky to have really really good teachers, like my professor Charles [Sweedeen?] in Cambridge from the British Antarctic said it was very tough but I learned the hard way. I spent the British Survey with a few seasons in Antarctica, and there was  
 [30:45.5] a really good lesson for me. Because in polar, the research there is such really one of the best.  And he passed away and I owe him a lot. Also to professor [Luis Livoutrin] from Grenoble, and he told me 20 years ago: Pedro, study the water parameters, the physical parameters of water 
 [31:19.7] in front of the glaciers. So in the 1990s I was the first one able to send a thermometer within, a very [x] one but spool, like a fishing one, and make it at the carpenter, with a nylon, and a hook to fish. Set a thermometer that went down in Upsala to 700 meters. And they found at that time, I was very scared to lose the thermometer, I found that the water below of Upsala (Upsala was not floating) it was almost 0 degree centigrade. 
 [31:51.7] Which is [x] on the surface. And it goes down to zero degrees, because it is a sublation melt water which comes below. These glaciers are tempered glaciers so they are zero pressure melting points. But the pressure melting points are reaching near zero degrees centigrade. So now we have ... we kept on studying with the Japanese colleagues which started to work in the 1990 here. 
 [32:18.7] And we owe them a lot because the Japanese came here from Hokkaido University and to Cuba, from different universities of Japan and also one could ask why did they come here to expend money so far away. Well, they were founded by the Minister of Sports Education and Culture. This is a fantastic example. We here do not invest. For me this was an example and a few years ago we went to measure in front of the three glaciers
 [32:51.9] of Viedma, Upsala, and Moreno and we found extraordinary discoveries, or remain very important discoveries on water parameters in front and close to the glaciers. And how they impact. It was once highlighted as one of the best papers in the American Geophysical Union of that year in 2000 ... Two years ago roughly. 
 **Interviewer:** [33:25.1] So does someone who has never been to the glacier, what would you tell them is special? What would you say is unique that they should appreciate about the glacier? 
**PEDRO:**  [33:38.3] This is the most difficult question. This is a very personal one. Well, for me the nicest ... These glaciers, it's ice, green, trees, and blue. And it's unique. You are very close to the glacier. You can see the glacier almost alive because ... You have to wait! I don't know if you have seen calving, finally. Have you seen a calving or not yet? ... No! 
 [34:19.5] Well, you are unlucky then. But you should stay in Mirador and patiently until the last part of the day when you have to leave and then you would go very early at first and then coming back and you would see it. And this is really something so magnificent, so unique. I don't know ... One of the things that is important 
 [34:45.2] why study? Because there is no information on the glaciers. This is very important for many many reasons, as I mentioned at the beginning. From the scientific point of view, from the economical point of view, tourism, hydro-power, even if I am against. Because they haven't made a serious impact assessment study. 
 [35:13.7] I was never saying I was against but today, nowadays you have many alternative energies. I know that I am going out of the question you are asking here but I mean, 15 years ago I said this, that we could use this, but at that time there were no alternative energies so advanced. And today we have the wind, you have been here, you have seen which is always present almost.
 [35:44.0] We have sun. In all Patagonia. And we have the Japanese, a joint project here in North of the province: Santa Cruz. There are working on the ... hydrolic electricity. No no.
 [36:20.7]  I have a lagoon right now [in Spanish]. You will edit it. Pico Truncado. 
 [36:49.2] Hydrogen!! They are already exporting, this is a joint project with Argentina and Japan. They made the first hybrid cars. The Japanese were here for 15 days. And finally they ended at Pico Truncado. There is a joint project with Argentinean scientists and Japanese. But they are producing energy already from hydrogen.  
 [37:22.8] And they built, Nissan built a big boat with containers to transport. ... [We will leave just on time] 
 **Interviewer:** [37:44.9] This is a scientific argument. But you said it's almost alive. How can something be ALMOST alive?
**PEDRO:**  [37:55.5] Oh this is complicated. It is so personal, it's not ... It's subjective I know. People ask me when I first saw the ice: an ice rupture, or the ice dam  rupture. I was impressed and I couldn't talk. I would suggest that everybody would see. There are thousands of people coming to Calafate to see, there are thousands there. 
 [38:19.6] We cannot stay at night and so on. But it's a phenomenon in nature which you see it here. You don't see it ... It's like an Aurora maybe in the North, or in the South. If you can get to see them, I got to see them only once and it was very North and very unique and very special I don't know why. In our station in Marambio. And they awoke me at night and I said don't disturb me. 
 [38:49.2] I was living in a tent. And then I went out and it was just unique. This is more ... The other one is every year, during the Polar Night. So it's difficult to say. When I go to the glacier, of course, but this is egoistic, no: I would like to not see so many people around there. [Laughter]. And talking. And people should be silent and just watching. And not shouting. 
 [39:21.1] Because this is ... Sometimes I was staying there because we work and we have permission, or a permit to stay there. In a late afternoon we've finished doing measurements, then I went for a few hours on the Mirador or close to the glaciers. And just listen to the glacier. And watch and listen and so: IT'S ALIVE ANYWAY! 
 [39:48.0] But I go against my designer of this thing because he says it's alive, it moves, it's almost in constant motion due to the gravity, but he doesn't cry, the cracks of course because it makes noise of course but he describes it like a glacier cries, suffers and so on. 
 [40:09.6] But this also again is subjective interpretation. But it's beautiful. Specially when you see it in a different light of the day. Like today, have you seen? We have the slight East wind in the morning. You probably didn't observe that. You could see all the mountains. Clear. And they are still clear now. But this part, if you were there, because we spoke by phone, there was sun. And it would have been probably a nice day today. 
 [40:38.7] And half away here it was cloudy. So there was a grain fall. There was no grain, it was hail! In Calafate at midday. On the glaciers you see during a day different colors, different scenes, different sensations. 
