### Evangelina @ Rivendel Cottage / Chaltén [2019 01 05]

 [00:02.5] EVANGELINA: We never formalized an NGO: we do have an intent to do so, but until now we haven't got there yet. [Laughter]. Or we haven't focused. I can tell you: I am already working with Anfibio, PhD, my daughter. But yes, it would be something that we would like to materialize in an NGO. And already without being an NGO, we work with an NGO which is Ambiente Sur, in Río Gallegos, 
 [00:32.5] where they work with the Patagonian urban reservations, and we are working as a network with other urban reservations through out Argentina and Chile, Santa Cruz, Tierra del Fuego. So we have been working, so what you mention about which actors intervene is in the whole of these countries. 
Phil: We are shooting, we can start.   
[01:32.4] Benji: The questions with which we would like to begin are about how did you come over here, present yourself, your academic and professional profile, as of your interests growing up, how did you decide to study what you do, how did you consider coming to live here in Chaltén. 
 [02:04.4] Mi name is Evangelina Vettese. I was born in Quilmes, Buenos Aires, and at age 9 I decided to study Ecology. A lot that had to do with this was a talk that was given at school, by an ecologist. And at that time I was mesmerized by nature. I always had that feeling: of coming close to nature. I lived in a neighborhood  
 [02:31.0] the garden in my home was full of fruit trees and so, but I never had the same feeling of living savage or Sylvester nature as I could find here in Chaltén many years later. But since that time I realized that it was what I was aiming for. So I finished my studies at school and began to study at La Plata University. 
 [03:02.9] I went through the bachelor's degree in Biology and I went through the ecology orientation. 2010 I graduated. 2011 I came to live over to Chaltén [Laughter], thanks to my partner Rodrigo, who is also an ecologist. We came together along with my daughter. When I arrived to Chaltén I had that feeling of being able to come near nature. We lived in a house that 
 [03:32.3] had the lagoon right over the corner, and today it is the urban natural reservation that I've been talking about. Of course, being in such a place, like Chaltén, that is very small, all the development is so sudden, and you can start seeing how the urban steps over the natural. And having lived in a place where the natural is practically extinct, 
 [04:00.3] in a very populated neighborhood in Buenos Aires, we started to traction. One of the first things to do was to ensemble a group of volunteers to work over that urban reservation... Which became an urban reservation afterwards. In the middle of all this I am also studying, making my PhD career in Biological Sciences, working with the forest's biodiversity, the native forest from here, in Patagonia, Santa Cruz. 
 [04:31.8] Phil: What is ecologically unique about this area? 
 [05:00.5] EVANGELINA: The most characteristic feature of Chaltén may be species that are also represented in other regions of Patagonia. A lot of endemic species, proper from this place. Some species like the huemul, some types of orchids, several kinds of bumblebees [abejorros mangangá], 
 [05:35.8] Overall, one outstanding feature from Chaltén as a town, is the fact that it is inserted into a ecotone, a transition between the forest and the steppe. So this delivers much more biodiversity because it has a repertoire of flora and fauna that is intermediate, with elements from both parts, of both ambiences. 
 [06:02.5] You could add up both rivers, Río de Las Vueltas, and Fitz Roy; with their riveras, which also give a different additional biodiversity. From the ecological point of view you get high quality water, landscapes, species, and the ecotone. 
 [06:29.7] Benji: Rodrigo commented that there's something that happens both in the water as in the terrain, that there's a lot of flora, as much as fauna, coming from the outside, and there's a competition: and that the non native species are gaining a lot of ground. Do you see this too?  Do you see some part that is still being able to maintain itself alive? Because you are studying the forest. What could you comment on that?
 [07:01.1] EVANGELINA: Yes. In aquatic ambiences as in terrestrial, all over the world you can find the phenomenon of biological contamination. It's unstoppable, that's what it seems like. And it's the arrival of species that are not originated from one place, they are the exotic species and they normally tend to grow exponentially, and that is when they become invaders. A lot of times, that establishment of invading species 
 [07:32.3] generates a receding of the native plants and animals. It's a contamination of a once pristine ambient, that in Patagonia at least is happening from the beginning of the 1900s, when the ranchers arrive with cattle: sheep and cows, and pastures. 
 [08:01.6] From that time on, that was the boom of exotic species. And yes, there are other species that become endangered of extinction. They already are some that are endangered already, like the mara patagónica, which is a kind of hare, a huge bunny. It's not here, we can't find them here, and they used to be around this area, for instance. 
 [08:30.2] Also the mangangá, a bumblebee, native endemic and with other bumblebees their population is decreasing rapidly. We haven't seen any in years. So it is a big deal, and many times it becomes difficult, even impossible to stop these exotic populations. 
 [09:03.1] Phil and April: Preservation Policies and Conservation, whether the Park is effective. 
 [09:23.3] Benji: We have been discussing how much the Preservation Policies are being effective, be it in a positive or negative way, or even with no effect. Also considering that it has been a long time since it was declared National Park, almost a century  [EVANGELINA: 1937.], yes, 80 years.  
 [10:02.9] And also it has been 30 years since it became Heritage Site. So has National Parks played a role, or not? And other institutions, and other regulations. 
 [10:18.2] In my opinion the role of National Parks has been key for the working of the town itself, Chaltén. Even despite the urban area of Chaltén is not part of the National Park, it is completely surrounded by the Los Glaciares National Park. The policies by National Park are simple, clear, they move forward and there are observable improvement on communication, the huemul has been very well managed. 
 [10:49.7] They have many points to be highlighted. It's not enough. A lot of times you can find that it is not aligned with the rest of policies around the province, nation, and not even considering the municipal level. Bit by bit, there's an intent to work together, but the dialogue is not very open. So those are big problems to be resolved. 
 [11:22.5] And many times, when it's a touristic area, the struggle among the economical and the touristic promotion wins over conservation or sustainable tourism. And we are just going through that path. They sometimes seem to be incompatible. 
 [11:52.9] Translating to April. 
 [12:25.9] April: Can conservationists, policies, and tourism coexist together? 
 [12:52.6] Cows and conservation... Do you have observations on what has happened and what can be done? 
 [13:22.7] EVANGELINA: Historically, in Argentina and the world the production is much more valued than the development and process... The ranchers nowadays in Patagonia is not but one example of the advancement of big extensions of territory that became completely modified by the invasion of sheep, in the beginning, 
 [14:03.8] and cows later on, in the first 20, 40 years of the century. The best territory had been used for pasture, and were already wasted, steppe needed by that time re seeded again, because erosion was moving forward. 
 [14:31.8] Production was not working out, so then there is a movement over the forest, with cows. Just then, and with pastures, to maximize development. Ranchers also undertake the killing of pumas, and guanacos too. 
 [14:59.3] The ranchers, with a very negative view, over the local fauna, as competition. So it's not only about the erosion by sheep, the introduction of cows with pastures into the forest, also the eradication of guanacos, and pumas, and foxes, and with state politics that supported those kind of killings, that moved on top, so that cattle could improve, that big investments don't go lost. So it is a very historical process. 
 [15:39.5] It is very rooted in a culture that prioritizes the rancher over the local fauna and the ambient. 
 [16:02.0] Translating. 
 [16:37.9] April: Are they wild cows? Feral ones? 
 [17:21.7] Is there a certain amount of cows that do not belong nowadays to private owners and have become salvage? 
 [17:40.4] EVANGELINA: Yes. The ranchers and cows exist prior to the creation of National Parks, so when the Park was created it is allowed for owners and local population to go on with their activities, in this case livestock, always under certain standards, for example the amount of weight supported, the number of animals, the dimension of the area they are going to use for pasture [permiso de pastorar-pastaje]. 
 [18:12.3] A lot of times that is not complied with. There are several cases in the history of Los Glaciares National Park of a persecution of those who do not comply and there is a lot of impunity, the landowners have a lot of power. 
 [18:43.6] So either they don't follow the rules, with fencing to contain the cattle, and there is no maintenance. So what was once a respectful thing ends out not being so, and by another hand, in the Los Glaciares National Park I know that there is a case of wild cows, that have remained there as bagualas,
 [19:14.7] that go around freely, with no owners. But that is not in this area, it is in the area of Península Avellaneda, that would be were Lago Argentino is, more North from here, sorry: South. And in this area there are some cows bagualas, but not inside the National Park but in the Lago del Desierto reserve, it is very clear there that the owner does not own them, he has stopped producing, and they remained feral. 
 [19:51.9] Very close to the lake. So there are very specific cases that are close, others that seem not to have owners but have, and others without owners. 
 [20:15.4] Phil: I have a book here about Chaltén, it's brand new and the author was here for some time. It's a long and dry book. [EVANGELINA: I don't know about it.] 
 [20:47.7] Phil: In one chapter, he makes an argument that cows, were taken out of the park so that the park could appear wild to all the tourists. And I am wondering what your thoughts may be.   
 [21:15.4] [Benji Translates]
 [21:39.9] EVANGELINA: Let me see if I understood. The way that cattle has been handled, there are several techniques. And whatever is on the production side is very extracting, up to an extreme. National Parks aims for a sustainable management in relation to the pre existing activity which is livestock. If National Parks would seek to do conservation exclusively, which is not the case, because the Parks were not created for that, they have tourism, culture, and local populations, 
 [22:25.4] Considering that National Parks don't have a single function, of conservation; then they need to make conviviality out of tourism, conservation, taking care of the local populations inhabiting from before the creation of the park. In case it would only do conservation, probably they would extract the cows, and this would not only make the appearance of the landscape better, but rather would improve the condition, the place's quality. 
 [22:52.9] My research analyses specific spaces in the forest, of unsuccessful sections [relictos], of ñires, of  Nothofagus antarctica. Ñire grows in the ecotone, in general, and these sections, are forest-like inserted into the steppe, away from the forest. So I study the diversity of plants and birds, and the structure of trees, and the rings of growth both in these sections [relictos] compared to the surrounding area. 
 [23:24.6] And of the most relevant issues, what you can see the most, is the fact that where you can find cattle, everything gets ruined, the plant composition, the exotic are the only that are abundant. Even in the forest, the cows hurt the forest because they scratch against the trees,  
 [23:54.9] so they generate less growth. And they eat the X, or stomp on the regeneration, so they are forests that do not continue their natural cycle. Because the seeds fall down, but don't ever [or with a lot of trouble] grow back again. To replace the dying trees. 
 [24:23.5] Normally these sections [relictos] are surrounded by estancias. And they also use the firewood. So everything that is related to cattle, generates decreases in the landscape and the ambient conditions, it's not only about what is in the sightseeing, for image. 
 [24:54.6] Phil: I am always happy when we have an ecologist. 
 [25:19.8] April: Is there any practices that she's working on now in the area? Projects, and then that. 
 [25:43.3] Benji: There is a wide area of involvement here, on what you're doing. You spoke of several topics. Is there something you would like to add of your activity or your interests? 
 [26:09.0] EVANGELINA: I work at school with the science clubs. It's an extra curricular activity, at all school levels. Here in Chaltén we have only one school for each level. Through projects that are presented to the Education Counsel at provincial state level, the projects get approval year by year, moving forward with the science club. 
 [26:38.9] Students are invited to participate and since I am into education, I have been able to participate in several projects. One was related to didymo, which is the exotic invading algae in rivers: that was with the nocturnal school. So with the adults we could work a lot on that issue and build up a map, with geo referencing in the places where we could find didymo, even before than National Parks would recognize their existence. 
 [27:12.7] So even despite these initiatives, there was not much more later on to get more support to try to diminish or stop the impacts of didymo locally. But even being so, the information is available and is current. 
 [27:36.3] That was one of the projects. And the other projects were in the primary school, with the little kids. We worked on the natural urban reserves here in to town, to acknowledge the place, it's value, the biodiversity, of birds, of plants. 
 [28:02.8] These are at least the ones in which I have been participating actively. And one can notice a great deal of interest by part of the studentship, as well as from the families. So it is interesting and nice to give forward. Not only looking for information but rather trying to reach people and that the information becomes vox populi, that we can all manage the same information, to value and take care of the environment, from which we are so close, all of us here living.
 [28:33.8] Benji: There is a question on a wider scope, since this research spans over a period of five years, and studying the situation all over the world, to consider specific points: the big title of the project is In the name of the savage, wild. 
 [29:03.1] Wild in Spanish can be ... [EVANGELINA: Sylvester!] somewhat incomplete, with not a single clear meaning. If you could grasp the meaning in English, could you tell us what does it mean to you? And if there's anyway to distinguish between wild and wilderness, if there could be any subtleties. [EVANGELINA: Wilderness?] Wild!! 
 [29:31.4] EVANGELINA: In Spanish I would translate that into savage, or Sylvester. Because savage sounds like something that is aggressive or violent. It has that connotation. 
 [30:00.4] Sylvester instead sounds more like something that is more remote, truly natural, pristine, and without intervention of the human hand, without the human population's touch over a space or a species. Because, if I should lookup for a contrast, I would go over to the domesticated, or to the urban perhaps. 
 [30:32.6] Benji: Considering Patagonia, we have a contrast between what outsiders may consider as Patagonia and the local people. Do you have a perception that foreigners and locals see this in a different way, and if they consider it wild?
 [31:01.6] EVANGELINA: [Time for thought, reflects.] In my view, I understand that foreigners and visitors can find Patagonia wild. And some part of this has to do with the great extensions of land with no urbanization of any kind, apparently pristine, apparently silvestre. 
 [31:33.0] The reality is that there is not one single forest in Patagonia, not even a single piece, not even an hectare of steppe that hasn't been populated, or used by men. Be it by burnings, mining, so if we get strict about the pristine, of what is virgin: Patagonia is not virgin.  
 [32:00.2] In very remote areas it perhaps may be. In the heights of the mountains, but in wherever place you could visit, as tourists and foreigners do, ... Not at all. 
Phil: Let's narrow the focus down from Patagonia to Parque Nacional Los Glaciares. Are there areas, 
 [32:31.8] in the park that you consider wild? ... Beside on the mountain tops. 
 [33:00.3] [Benji Translates] 
 [33:16.6] EVANGELINA: There ARE areas in the Park that are wild. There are remote places inside the Park, without accessing into the high mountains, which does not imply that they are completely silvester, with no human intervention. 
  [33:44.5] One can feel in a totally desolated area in many places of the National Park. Which does not imply that it hadn't had a history of anthropic usage in that space. 
 [34:16.4] Phil: Do people belong in wild places? April: Maybe she went over this: Is wilderness marketed? 
 [34:44.6] Do you bring people here ... ? [Benji: Yes! (afterwards: MASSIVE FACEPALM!!!!, sorry!!!! What a rookie.)] 
 [34:53.9] EVANGELINA: Maybe. Because perhaps what is savage, remote, one could consider a marketing strategy, touristic. But despite that, people, visitors, will leave with the feeling that they were in a remote place. 
 [35:19.3] This even happens for us, when we go for a stroll through a path out of season, it would seem that you're unique, that there is no other person around for a very long distance. And this happens even leaving very few meters away from town. Very close around you can feel very isolated, completely immersed in nature. That is a real feeling. 
 [35:49.4] ... Despite that the space ... 
Benji: Phil mentioned in another question that despite all the obstacles, even when it is not easy to find anything properly wild, the idea of being inside of nature: do humans belong to the wild? 
 [36:25.1] EVANGELINA: Well, when I mentioned that you can feel alone, that is actually without any other people around. But totally immersed in a world, in a nature surrounded be many species, many living creatures. Be them the plants, that convey a whole bunch of things, of sensations, and the animals that inhabit that space. 
 [36:54.4] April: Maybe a final question of what is the wildest place that she's ever been to? 
 [37:15.8] EVANGELINA: That's difficult. [Thinking]. I've been in the Parque Nacional Perito Moreno, it's relatively nearby here. And however it has been intervened by livestock, and it has a history of anthropic use, 
 [37:44.8] one can feel truly desolated. It's known that there are no people for many kilometres around. And perhaps it is not the most inhospitable but perhaps it is. 
April: Perhaps one last question on the wind. If you were to describe to someone, what the wind is like here, someone who has never been here before, how would you describe the wind to people who've never been here before?
 [38:15.0] EVANGELINA: It's difficult to describe the wind for people who haven't lived it. Because, they will not imagine it. Even if you tell them about it. You have strong storms of wind, when you narrate about it, it would seem that you're exaggerating, that it's a lie what you're saying. But yeah, you can feel it in your whole body. 
 [38:47.4] It blows your legs away, [Laughter]. You feel very vulnerable. Or having to put a lot of strength just to maintain on your feet. And grab yourself onto something. The wind is a phenomenon very characteristic of this place. So it's part of this place's identity. It's a thing that even if it can bore you, [Laughters] to live in such a place, when you can connect with the wind, it's a splendid feeling.  
 [39:20.0] Phil: Is there anything that we haven't asked that she would like to share with us about this place and this ecosystem?
 [39:54.4] EVANGELINA: I can tell you a bit about what it's like to live here. [Laughters]. To me I get to have the label of ecologist [ecologista] in this Chaltén society. The [activist] ecologist [ecologista], as a difference to the science person [ecologista], which are two similar but different concepts, it's easy to label as an activist. 
 [40:20.7] Many times, when the work is voluntary it would seem as if you would have other interests in the eyes of the people that live with you. Because since Chaltén is so small we all live together with many people with in-numerous different interests along with each other. But one thing that I would like to point out is the fact that, at least from my point of view, I understand nature as something that is perfect. 
 [40:50.1] Perhaps the only thing that I find being perfect in the world. Over here, in this part of the country, Pachamama, it's a very interesting and important concept. And Pachamama is not the nature alone, and conservation, and leaving a place intact. 
 [41:19.6] It is rather our society living along in the natural space with respect, without ... As I interpret it, being able to establish a conviviality. And that both parts, the human and society as much as what is natural can be in good health, enjoying it, and with respect: in equilibrium. There is the difference between the ecologist as activist and as scientist.
 [41:48.9] It would seem that the soil is supreme and, in my point of view, where I see it as a global thing. Society has a very important value, culture, identity, and the contact and relationship with nature. That equilibrium is what I aim for. From my actions. 
