### LaQuinta @ Chaltén [2019 01]

**Start** \[01:49.1\]
**End** \[46:28.9\]

**Interviewer:**  [01:49.1] We normally start with people stating their name, a presentation of profile, what you do and where we are. Could you tell us about that?
**PATRICIA:** [02:02.6] Yes, my name is Patricia Halvorsen. We are in Estancia La Quinta, in Chaltén, Santa Cruz, Patagonia. Currently we have a touristic business, but the story of our family began many years ago. By the end of the XIXth Century, when from Norway Halvor Halvorsen comes over here. From then on, 
 [02:33.4] our story begins in the area. Halvor Halvorsen was my grandfather, he came to populate to Argentina in 1905, and he comes to populate the area of Lake Viedma. From then on, the family has uninterrupted presence in the area. We are the oldest family of the area.  
 [03:04.4] Our children are the fourth generation. 
**Interviewer:**  [03:09.6] As for activities, you are a communicator about the history of the area, is that so?
**PATRICIA:**  [03:12.9] Yes. I focus on writing about Patagonia's history exclusively. Many of the topics on which I decided to write were due to questions that the guest presented. For instance, they would say: the tehuelches [aboriginal population] don't exist anymore. They're extinct. And I would say, yes they are! There are a lot of descendants from tehuelches. But we haven't seen any! They would reply. The matter is that they don't live as they used to years ago. 
 [03:42.7] They have mixed up and I give them an example all the time, it's a bit funny but it's true. I have 4 viking grandfathers and I don't go around with a helmet with horns. So, at that moment I wrote a book called "Masked Identities" [Identidades Enmascaradas] which is the cross between the tehuelches and the foreigners, with the immigrants. 
 [04:10.5] And in this way, other topics become developed. And well, with so many questions, we organized everyday History Talks, under the name "Encounters with History", where we tell them about the evolution in the area from the arrival of the first white man, until today. 
 [04:35.7] [Translating]
**Interviewer:**  [05:20.0] You mentioned mapuches?
**PATRICIA:** [05:26.6] They are in the North of Patagonia. 
**Interviewer:**  [05:30.1] And how do you develop this activity? Did you use documentation to get informed about the area? 
**PATRICIA:** [05:37.8] Yes. I work mainly with documents and that is what it makes more complicated. Because with people that write poetry or fiction, I always say: Isn't that great? You get inspired in the calm of your home, with a coffee, you reflect and suddenly you can have a success. And I spend my time going to museums, archives, looking for information at different places,
 [06:07.3] and so we need to take a lot of time. Right now, some days ago, we placed our last book. I say we, because it's a co production with a person from Tierra del Fuego. And it's the story of prostitution in the Santa Cruz and Tierra del Fuego territories. We took five years for that one researching. 
**Interviewer:**  [06:31.1] The title has quite in impact to it because upon sunlight they are not so visible. And finding that kind of things and spread the word is ... 
**PATRICIA:**  [06:41.0] Yes. Here, maybe because we have such a long trajectory in Santa Cruz, but everything is easier. Because actually for the great surface (Santa Cruz comes after Buenos Aires in size), so it's second in order of importance size wise. But not in population. So when we speak about this,
 [07:11.1] there were very few people around this immense geography. Something that happens a lot of times to me is that people come and say I am such and such. So maybe I don't know him, besides I am very bad to remember a face, but if it's a last name from people historically from Santa Cruz, I would tell them quite soon: you're from Río Gallegos, you are from such place, and they would respond, "Oh yeah!". 
**Interviewer:** [07:36.2] And how could a connection be made between that space distribution and the population so that you can work more easily? How do you get that? 
**PATRICIA:** [07:48.9] It's hard. It's very hard. Specially because in the first period of populating the territory, the area that is going to work in cattle, in the beginning, later on all of the province of Santa Cruz is going to do work with cattle. But the more productive side was from San Julián towards the South. So it has been an area that has dominated very easily. 
 [08:18.3] When I have to handle myself more North I always have to look more to the maps, more the lots of land, and the population comes later, because the Northern area of Santa Cruz arises when they find petroleum. So it's like there are two separate historical moments, and it's much easier to deal with the first. But, nonetheless, we do it all the same. 
**Interviewer:** [08:46.0] [Translating]
**Interviewer:**  [09:17.9] The question I have is about the broad set of topics that you've worked with. Is there a rupture between the time frameworks you have dealt with based on their accessibility? Or do you work over a certain range of years backwards and forwards? 
**PATRICIA:** [09:41.0] It depends on the topic I am working on at each time. But in general I go both sides. Because sometimes the stories fire me off towards different points, and many times I am in a story that is quite ... For instance, right now I am working on the 50s, which is a period I seldom do since I accustom to go further back, and I find people and I say: Oh, look at this, this person was over here. One gets to navigate so much in those times, that 
 [10:12.7] suddenly you find acquaintances that you have never met! But they result familiar. 
**Interviewer:** [10:21.5] Would you know, as you mentioned before that you focused more on the arrival of the white man, have you seen historical records of the previous time? 
**PATRICIA:** [10:36.0] No. Because before that there were only aboriginals, and they are no written accounts. So that's an archaeological competence. 
**Interviewer:** [Translating]
**Interviewer:** [11:23.0] So I see that you have several topics that you have been handling, have you found relationships, differences, what has pointed you towards one side and another? 
**PATRICIA:** [11:33.8] There are always relationships. Many times I use for a new research some material from a previous one. Just to comment, many years ago I wrote a book that has long been out of print, which was "Among the turn over rivers and the continental ices" [Entre los ríos de las vueltas y los hielos continentales],
 [12:00.8] and a lot of people said that it was a book about my family? And I would response that it wasn't. It's a book about the pioneers of the area. Because this area was really very populated. There is a chapter that does correspond to my family, and I like very much the pioneers quotations. My grandfather left written material behind, and so in that book I quote, for instance,
 [12:30.2] when he arrives by accident. And he arrives in a boat that sets fire, when they are entering to the Strait of Magellan. He arrives in 1895, the Panama Channel didn't yet exist, so all boats had to access through either Cape Horn, or the Strait of Magellan. When they're about to enter to the SM
 [13:00.6] the fire sets by spontaneous combustion. The coal that they were bringing over from Swansea and they were taking it over to San Francisco. So, what a ride right? ... Up unto arrival to the West Coast of USA. And well, upon that incident, the captain tells them that they should change course and try to get towards the Islas Malvinas, to ask for rescue. 
 [13:30.9] Fortunately from the Islands they see them, they go rescue the whole crew, and Halvor Halvorsen, my grandfather, is going to leave an report of his arrival to the Islands. Among those things, he narrates, as it was very naturalized at the time, his visit to the brothel. That bibliography is what I used again in the book I just mentioned. 
**Interviewer:**  [14:01.0] [Translating]
**Interviewer:** [14:38.5] I am under the impression that perhaps one gets to speak to a broad public, such as we've been with guides, business people, and there's a much more recent idea of history of the place. Well, they would say that before there were no streets, the town was founded in such year, and that's actually ... The vast amounts of periods to be established are several. 
 [15:09.2] Perhaps this could be a question for you to extend a long time. What would you say about that?
**PATRICIA:** [15:15.4] The town is a very young one. It has the age of our oldest children, 33 years old. Practically speaking, for a town it's almost recently born. Besides that it has a very peculiar formation and very different from other towns in the same province and in the whole of Patagonia. 
 [15:43.6] Because actually it's going to be established to vouch for the sovereignty in the area due to a conflict we had with Chile. The conflict was born in 1965. The town is established in 1985. And just in 1995 the arbitration will be pronounced in favor to Argentina and Lago del Desierto, that it's definitely from Argentina. 
 [16:14.7] A lot of times you can hear that thanks to Chaltén was that Lago del Desierto is Argentinian. Well, actually the story doesn't go so much that way. Because town were never precedence for sovereignty, due to a simple reason: they wouldn't exist. So, the precedents WERE the pioneers: the people that already lived here. And they were many. What happened is that by the time of the conflict, some because they'd died, others because they sold land, and others because they went away, 
 [16:48.5] the population shrank severely and actually over time there wasn't a state policy to continue vouching the town settlers. Already by the conflict we were only two families, by that time. We were one of them, and the other were the Sepúlveda. 
 [17:21.2] The town already has a generation of its own, with a whole new gathering. Of course they have a whole generation that was born there but before that, people of my age or older, from before of the town foundation, we are literally four. Two are Sepúlveda grandchildren, Antonio Rojo and myself. The rest is all people from outside. 
**Interviewer:** [17:49.4] I'm going to ask you something about Antonio Rojo, [translating]
**Interviewer1:**  [18:47.6] How long has her family lived here? **Interviewer2:** 100 years [This is based on her grandfather coming over, lost in translation before but can be read above. Anyhow, (palmface), perhaps I could've double checked that with her and ask the question anyhow. Not sure, I am still learning to interview in two languages, sorry for these kind of omissions.] Even above 100, so it crosses through three centuries. [PATRICIA assents ...does she understand?]
**Interviewer:**  [18:55.8] Why did her family come here? 
**PATRICIA:** Because of the accident that I commented about. That my grandfather was working in a boat [going all the way to San Francisco and with no Panama Channel yet build.] 
**Interviewer:** [19:30.7] [Translating] [PATRICIA assents]
**Interviewer:** [19:37.6] Are you happy that you ended up here? 
**PATRICIA:** [19:41.9] YES!! OF COURSE!! ["YEAH" she adds in English!!] 
**Interviewer:** [19:48.8] I remember a name. We've been asking permission to Parques Nacionales for each place where we go to film and interview. At one point they said that over here we should be fine to film as long as you are OK with that. And they also said that we should ask Antonio Rojo. Could you tell us about this? To film over here in the outdoors section. 
**PATRICIA:** [20:26.0] No. Over here he has nothing to do. He's my neighbor. I can tell you some more just so that you understand the relationship. But here he has no part. When my father died, I was very young, I was three years old. And my mom married my neighbor, who is Antonio Rojo. But they live next doors and it's another estancia that has nothing to do with this one. 
**Interviewer:** [21:02.6] [translating] 
**Interviewer:** [21:20.8] There's a certain geography, for what you are telling us, about how the people that have been arriving, and how they've settled. Could you say that in some sense there's some kind of separation that Chaltén is over there and the pioneers are perhaps more on this side? You mentioned four persons. Two here, and two others are close or further away? 
**PATRICIA:** [21:43.8] No no. Actually the first settler that was over here was in 1900, was a German called Fred Otten. And was located exactly where Chaltén is. So, no, settlers were all over the area. Even until the North section of Lago del Desierto. 
**Interviewer:** [22:09.8] And given the situation that we are in Chaltén and we can take a taxi over here. Do you feel that it all belongs to a single place or that they have separate histories and spaces? 
**PATRICIA:** [22:19.5] History is marked by periods. If we consider the time of my grandparents, it was just the neighbor next to you, or just across. Everyplace was in allotment that belonged to a family. Also, by that time families were large, because everyone had between 4, 5 or 6 children. I remember when 
 [22:50.2] they opened the first school in Chaltén, well it was a great event. Because it was a nascent town and such. So it was an important and pleasant moment. And at that time my oldest uncle was still alive. He would say that all of them families together were more than triple the amount. Of course! Because everyone had 6 children, as minimum. And there's pictures of the whole families, all in order, in formation. 
**Interviewer:** [23:18.5] There was no TV. 
**PATRICIA:** [23:20.5] Yes. It was another life style. Some days ago they asked me. What would my grandparents had thought that this place became touristic. I believe that they would've never thought of such a thing. Because it was a different time, life was seen fro another perspective. It was a very sacrificed life. 
 [23:50.2] All parameters and measures were different. It's the same now with historical revisionism, which is a trend. Many times history is judged with our parameters. And that really is not possible. 
**Interviewer:** [24:19.1] How do you see the progression in history from that once rough life towards what it is today with tourism? Also considering that perhaps not so many people are aware that this place is declared a Natural World Heritage Site. 
**PATRICIA:** [24:42.8] I believe that to us the presence of the town alleviates our life. Because in other times, even when I was a little girl, at estancias you would receive everyone over. People that were just coming by and they we had never seen in our life and they came to sleep over and eat. 
 [25:09.2] And if a car would break, the whole town's activity would stop to fix it, so that they would be able to leave. That was always that way. There was no other way. So, when we would go to town, as a little girl I had a fantastic time, because besides of the bad roads and so, I didn't suffer that because that was for my parents to worry, not me. So for me it was all great. 
 [25:40.4] But all the purchases were to be done prior over the coast. Because that's where the towns were. Nowadays you need some butter and you go over to town. You need to see a doctor and you go over there. If you need to run an errand and you have available official legal establishments, or wherever you may need in town next door. So, it's an important factor for development, and also with these changes over history, everything has also reversed. 
 [26:13.1] Because many years back, the majority of the province's population was in the countryside. And now it's the opposite. Most people are in towns and the population has decreased in the countryside. 
**Interviewer:** [26:31.9] I see a lot of things that have been growing, progressing, changing. There's two time marks that we notice which are the establishment of the town on one hand, and on another hand, the declaration of the site being World Heritage. Do you feel that in any way this has limited life in any way? Or has placed obstacles to what you would've liked to do, or how you used to do things? 
**PATRICIA:** [27:04.0] No no. Not at all. I don't think there's any obstacles because of that. They're evolutions, phases, and so. Actually notice that the colonization takes shape long before to the establishment of the National Park. Because that's only by 1937. So from then on we try to live together. 
 [27:35.7] And we help quite much too. You might have noticed that nowadays recycling is in vogue. So when we walk around outside, I'll show you some tips of things that we've been recycling over time, and it's all the trend of saying that on a given day in town people are gathering such and such, and
 [28:08.0] we've been doing that week after week, our whole lives. And that's when there was no one around here. It was just the family. My mom would teach me that when I ate a candy I should throw the candy in my pocket. So everything is a matter of education. 
**Interviewer:** [28:30.3] Does she have the chance to work along with the Park administration ...
**PATRICIA:** [28:47.0] Yes. That's what I just told you about. 
**Interviewer:** [28:56.3] I believe that the angle of the question has a certain purpose that I would try to re phrase. There are certain time marks that may result clear to you along time and space. For instance in 1937 the Park begins as such, but we haven't heard of any other person with this awareness. So that shows us, correct me, that there's some nearby situation in this. 
 [29:25.9] Perhaps you even have a close agreement with them. So, is this exactly so, is there a fluid communication or simply something that is imposed by Park making rules... 
**PATRICIA:** [29:41.1] I'll tell you about the beginning of this subject of Parques. One of the promoters [difficult breath! Enough to highlight] arriving in the 1930s is the salesian de Agostini. He was a house guest. 
 [30:04.8] I am one to put together all the letters, and old things in existence that I can find. For instance when Parques Nacionales was beginning, and didn't even have yet an establishment with roof for the park rangers, nor information center, National Parks people would let us know that they would arrive and they also stayed over to sleep and so. And not only that, 
 [30:33.8] by that time there were no bridges as today. So they would also go over to pick them up, over to the river coast, they would cross them over, bring them... Oh, to me the old letters, I'm fascinated with them. Actually, since everything keeps on growing, 
 [31:01.0] of course we see the rangers, say hi, and they come and go. But before, since there was very little people, it was even a higher degree of contact. Because there was only one ranger. There wasn't even a butchery shop. So who would deliver the meat? We did. There has always been a back and forth with PN. 
**Interviewer:** [31:30.3] [Translating]
**PATRICIA:** [32:09.3] Let me give you a current example, when there's people that go for a hike and get injured, or that someone needs to be rescued by horse, well we give the Park some horses. So whenever they need something, if we have a pair of horses well, ...
**Interviewer:** [32:37.5] World Heritage was covered? [Yes] What are estancias, both in general and this one? 
 [33:10.4] Also, I'm under the impression that you manage to link the past with today, but also there's a public that is interested 
 [33:48.6] so that you can make presentations every day. Could you speak about that?
**PATRICIA:**  [33:55.7] About people coming over, in general when foreign guests arrive there's a percentage that wants to know how we live, what are our customs, why we are here. And one thing calls for the other. 
 [34:26.1] There's a niche of cultural tourism, that in our case has been widening naturally. Because we have our business for some time now, and so, as we did before, so people would come over and ask all sort of things. Concerns tend to be alike, because they're all related to the same geographical space. 
 [34:54.3] So it got to a point in which I would need to put this on schedule because it's the fifth time that I say this in a single day. So it came up by itself. And regarding estancias. It's normally in Patagonia, pastoral allotments of nearly 10,000 hectares. They can be some to be a little less, and many times two or more lots can come together to form a bigger one. 
 [35:37.1] That is the unity which is an estancia. And it's committed to livestock. Nowadays they are a trend because with this wordplay in Spanish, that is so rich, many times the word "estancia" is used as a fantasy word. So they use the name "Estancia whatever" to a weekend country house, or a slightly bigger area. 
 [36:04.2] But actually, what an estancia actually is, is a cattle estancia. 
**Interviewer:** [36:12.1] Is there anything specific of this one you'd like to mention?
**PATRICIA:** [36:17.1] No. Not too much compared to others that exist and have existed in the province. It was born with ovine cattle, and the only difference with some is that for some years we have changed sheep for Hereford cattle. 
**Interviewer:** [36:46.7] [Translating] 
 [37:02.9] Inscribed as Natural World Heritage Site in 1981, that was before Chaltén become developed. Did the inscription prompt the building of the town. 
**PATRICIA:**  [37:44.2] I'm not aware of any relationship between the inscription as Heritage Site and the town establishment.
**Interviewer:** [37:45.9] Have both time points impulsed people? Or were people happy about the inscription? 
**PATRICIA:** [37:57.0] Actually the people that used to live before were us alone. On the town establishment ... Well, yes, of course. The rest was like ... Not that we wouldn't give it any importance, but it's natural for us. So it wasn't such an impact, that would produce ...
 [38:26.7] We're used to take care. All the time. 
**Interviewer:** [38:34.3] [Translating.] [Rephrasing question] Was UNESCO's labeling beneficial to the town's establishment. 
**PATRICIA:**  [39:04.8] No. There's no relationship. No no. Because actually the town's establishment was because of the border situation. And actually Parques Nacionales opposed strongly to such establishment. Anyhow, the national government established it all the same, even despite the opposition.  
**Interviewer:** [39:35.7] [Translating] 
**PATRICIA:** [40:03.5] [Invites to the talk and mentions interesting topics along and offers more for afterwards.]
**Interviewer:** [40:21.0] From a cultural and historical point of view, the image of Patagonia for many North Americans, Canadians, and European, has been of an empty land. What are your thoughts, accurate, false? 
 [40:55.7] [Question to Spanish]
**PATRICIA:**   [41:19.3] We actually have a very vast surface. I wouldn't risk to say how much, but the population density is extremely low, really extreme. It is concentrated in cities, but it also has a lot to do with the possibilities.
 [41:50.6] It's the same with the activities. For example, you can now see that we are near Chaltén and that's why I'll use it as an example. You'll see that right now there's a lot of people due to tourism. This diminishes absolutely in winter. There's very few people. So, people arriving has a lot to do with these working periods. 
**Interviewer:** [42:29.4] A question about the wind. A possible description? To give people an idea, for those who couldn't come. 
**PATRICIA:**  [42:50.5] The days in which we don't have wind, this is very graphic ... We had a week with no wind. With beautiful days, with heat, the cows, the cat, were with there tongues out, very heated. And the guests were so happy. So they would say: is this normal? 
 [43:18.7] We have all sorts of things. We have splendid days, and in general in Patagonia there's wind. Sometimes a lot, sometimes there are bursts that go above the 100 kilometres per hour. And well, it's part of our whether. For those who aren't use to it, it's annoying, or weird. And suddenly they could say:
 [43:49.8] well the estancia is located in a very convenient place. That's why it was decided to locate it over here, it's protected and also from a water current coming from the mountain. Two basic conditions to settle. So a lot of times guests would come and the day is great, and I can't understand why they're coming back. So they'd say that in town there's a lot of wind. Of course. Because they're in the river's canyon. So, 
 [44:24.4] that's were all the wind gathers up. But we don't always have so much wind. Even if it's very frequent. 
**Interviewer:** [44:38.3] Is there a favorite memory here of living as a child? Or what does the landscape mean to you?
**PATRICIA:**  [45:14.2] I always say that if I would be placed in different spots with my eyes blind folded, I'd recognize the place by its smell. 
**Interviewer:**  [45:48.8] [Translating from before] Asking permission to take shots outside. 
**PATRICIA:**  [46:28.9] Of course!
