[Adolfo - lav.WAV](#adolfo---lav.wav)

Adolfo - lav.WAV
================

**Start** \[00:43.7\] 

**End** \[43:23.2\] 

### Adolfo @ Calafate [2019 01]

**ADOLFO:** [00:43.7] I'll tell you about this area and how it was populated. And then we can talk about the pioneers who were my grandparents. And then the development of all of town, Calafate, which was founded in 1927. My grandfather came 25 prior to the town's foundation. When he came over here there was nothing at all.  
 **Interviewer:** [01:16.2] We always begin with a simple matter, if you can present yourself with name, what do you do, and how did arrive to Calafate, coming from somewhere or how the history begins here. 
**ADOLFO:** [01:44.8]  I'll tell you the history. My name is Adolfo Santiago Jansma. Descendent by father's side from Dutch, and by mother's side from Croatian. We are now in the Estancia Nibepo Aique, inside the Parque Nacional Los Glaciares [PNLG] reserve. We are here because 108 years ago, a Croatian came over here, which was my grandfather, populating 
 [02:14.5] as many immigrants, mainly European, into the empty territory that all of our austral Patagonia. My grand parent came by horse, from the population that in that time was ... Well with the only available locomobility was by blood. There were no motors. So my grand father came by horse. The populating began from the east to the west. 
 [02:45.9] That is, from the Atlantic Ocean towards the Cordillera de Los Andes, where we are now. Behind of us, we have the Cordillera de Los Andes, we are backwards and to my left against the Cordón Perito Moreno, the Cerro that is in the middle is called Cervantes, which has snow. To my right Cordón Adriana. Behind that are the Continental Ices. And behind of that are the fjords of the Pacific Ocean. 
 [03:15.6] So we are very close. And right here the world ends. And comes the water of the Pacific Ocean. So my grandfather came by horse and kept moving forward trough each place he went through, and he could find a settler in each site. Once one could arrive and find a free space, what could you do? You would diagram a tentative map, with some referential points. By that time, 
 [03:44.4] this was National Territory. There did not exist any provinces as they do today. Where we are now it is the Santa Cruz province. It all depended on the National Territory. You would present at the closest Land Division. The place where my grand father did the procedure was in Puerto Deseado, which nowadays is far away: 1100 kilometers, and we go by car, or plane, and it's far away all the same.  
 [04:15.4] Imagine what it entailed by that time to go over to the Land Division for a procedure by horse. Well, he arrived moving forward and three estancias before from the east up to Nibepo Aique where we are, they found a estancia where he arrived after doing a daily average of between 60-70 kilometers by horse. He found himself in a estancia, three estancias away: Estancia Alta Vista, that belonged to other Croatians. 
 [04:50.3] Tipicich Family and Trutanich. And well, I could figure, because I'm not that old, that in 1912 he said Hello, and they responded in Croatian and they spoke the same language, and well, he asked about lands to people who had already populated another estancia, Alta Vista, and they told him to keep on towards the Cordillera, that if there were any available land ...  
 [05:20.8] it would be further against the Cordillera. So well, he arrived and in the place we are now, it was the only land remaining available. My grand father, as many immigrants he arrived with no capital of any kind. He arrived with a will to work, just like the rest of immigrants of that time. So well, he found this land free and requested the lease for this land at it was custom, because all the land was fiscal property. 
 [05:51.0] The lease for 20,000 hectares. The 20,000 hectares included up to the limit with the Glaciar Perito Moreno. So all this that we have behind us up to the Glaciar Perito Moreno, which is on my left, and 12,000 hectares that are to my right. Since my grand parent didn't have a dime, 
 [06:20.2] this Croatian family offers him to give him capital: sheep, what was all that was used to populate Patagonia from 1870, and mainly this province of Santa Cruz, it all becomes populated with sheep. The first sheep that arrive come from the Islas Malvinas [Falkland Islands]. And right there is when that population began with sheep, and it continues. So they give these sheep to my grandfather 
 [06:50.1] and he formulates a partnership which one could call of capital-industry: the capital given by these Croatian families, Croatian like himself, and he would offer the industry, which was the work. He did 57 kilometers of fencing. He did all the houses that we can see today in this estancia. And when we brought together this partnership, this estancia became La Jerónima. Still today, some maps references this place with that name. 
 [07:25.2] The name was given because one of my grandfather's partner's mother [Trutanich] was Jerónima. That's why this estancia was called Jerónima. Well, my grandfather began building the whole settlement, the facilities, the wool production and the shearing of taking of the wool from the sheep, 
 [07:55.3] annually it was sent with carriages nearly 5,000 kilograms of wool. And they took it over to Río Gallegos which had the only port allowed to ship with boats to export mainly to Europe. That was done once a year, they took 20 days by carriage,
 [08:25.6] they would do 20 kilometres by day, they are 400 kilometres. And on their way back, they would bring over all the food supplies and all the merchandise they would use throughout the year. So once a year, they would take the opportunity to go see the doctor, the dentist, do all that they needed to do. In one of those trips, up to Río Gallegos to sell his production, in the year 1924 he met another Croatian, María Martinich, and this my grandmother ended up marrying in 1925. 
 [09:00.4] From then on they had 4 children. The oldest son was Adolfo, that is why I'm called Adolfo: he was one of my uncles. He passed away by pneumonia when he was a year and a half. And they had three daughters: Radoslava, a Croatian name; Ángela, the second; and the third, María. 
 [09:30.6] The first was born in 1927; in 1931, the second; and 1934, the third. Radoslava was my mother. They kept on with production, and in 1936, my grandfather gets sick with tuberculosis, by that time there was no penicillin. So he goes to Córdoba, Argentina towards North where the people who was suffering this disease, they had a better climate. 
 [10:00.7] After that he doesn't come back. Already in 1936 my grandmother stays here alone with her three female daughters. The oldest was my mother: Radoslava, who being 9 years old, and with my grandmother not speaking in Spanish, would translate everything to her for her business. Even despite that she had her partners, who lived in the nearby estancia. In 1938, 
 [10:30.4] march 4th, my grandfather died in Córdoba, and my grandmother was left totally alone, and what all indicated was that a woman being alone, with no money, woman, with three female daughters, and her partners who had more capital, and being two men, they would buy her out. No. She ended up buying her partners' shares. In 1947. 
 [11:00.8] In 1947, when she buys, she had given her three daughters nicknames: Radoslava, deserved a nickname, they called her Niní; Ángela, Bebé; María, Porota. When she buys the estancia, 
 [11:30.3] she changes the estancia's name. Instead of Jerónima, she uses each of the first two letters of her daughters' nicknames: NiBePo. And Aike which in the native Tehuelche tongue means "the place of". The place of Niní, Bebé and Porota.  
 [12:00.4] That's why the pictures that you say in the museum, of the three daughters, as the guide should have told you, and there are some pictures with this background, it is in this same place. Later on, how does history continue? My father, who is from Mendoza [Argentina] comes over to work to the land owned by the Menéndez and Brown, 
 [12:30.3] who had territory all over Patagonia, both from Chile and Argentina. And after going through 4 or 5 places to work, he's destined towards estancia Anita, which is the first coming over here through Ruta 15, it's a very big estancia. And one day he gets to know that over here in this estancia in the 1950s that there are three unmarried women, and he come over here by horse,  
 [13:00.2] and met my mother, he chose one. And he married in 1956. With that marriage, were born 4 siblings: Carlos, my older brother; Silvia, my older sister; I am the third; and Santiago named after my grandfather Peso, who populated the area; and the fourth, my younger sister, Gladys. 
 [13:32.3] Over time Niní bought the other sisters their shares in 1985. And then, this was always used as a agricultural endeavour. When we bought the shares from our aunts, and just my mother's family remained here, Niní, we started with tourism.
 [14:02.1] with agro-tourism, in 1991. So, as families continue, both of my parents passed away. My mother in 1986, my father in 2008. I stayed over here with my older sister, and I am the one who lives here and I carry on with all the productive side and the touristic side of the estancia. 
 **Interviewer:** [14:34.0] Where are we? How is it possible to have a working farm inside the PNLG? 
 [15:01.3] [Arranging mic] 
 [15:17.6] In many parts of the world the farms are pushed out, but here we have a working farm inside the national park. How is it possible?  
 [15:36.4] [Benji translates]
 [15:49.6] Well, since my grandfather came over in 1912, the National Park was created in 1937, 25 years later. In the National Park Law there are two areas very well delimited. One is the National Park area properly speaking; and another one that is the reserve of the National Park. 
 [16:20.2] Those of us who are considered settlers of the PN are those we belong here from before of the creation of the PN. We have gained a right because of being over here 25 years prior. So, inside the area of PNLG, which in the area we are is from the Glaciar Perito Moreno up to Río Frías, 
 [16:50.6] All the area that is in front, of the Cordón Moreno, Cordón Adriana, is the area of the PNLG properly speaking. In that area, there cannot be any kind of breeding exploitation. From Río Frías, to the entrance of the PN, that is the reserve. In that area, by law, 
 [17:18.8] exists the chance to develop activities in tourism, with livestock, and there are even hunting reservations in other national parks ... Where foreign species have been inserted such as wild pigs. There are sawmills in some of the National Park reserves. So the law allows. 
 [17:51.7] The livestock allowed is only done in a extensive manner, not intensive with large amounts. So we for instance do, after state studies with the INTA [Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria], which controls all the pastures, 
 [18:22.5] since the National Park was created after the settlers there are species that are not native from here. This grass, which is chicory, is a foreign grass, seeded. 
 [18:50.7] This one is clover, also inserted, seeded. All these flowers, which are lupines, is inserted, non native from the park. The conclusion, after the studies, was that it is preferable undertake a controlled use of pastures, because left alone, the exotic pastures kill the native ones.  
 [19:30.3] So we regularly do pasture control. The people from INTA do it: with agronomic engineers, forest agronomists, who are those who control so that no desertification shall occur ...  
 [20:00.5] And in Argentina this exists in different National Parks. The conclusion was that it is preferable to work with cows rather than sheeps. Because the cow eats the grass, goes through it with their tongue, and cuts with their teeth whatever they reached with their tongue. If there's not enough grass, they can't cut it out.  
  [20:31.2] The sheep instead, eat like this, so it takes off the whole root. So it was decided that there should not be any sheep production, that is, at an extensive level. What my grandfather used to do had 12,000 sheep here. Now, you can find 150, only for the shearing demonstration. 
 [21:00.2] So that people can see the long century activities, using scissors, and to eat a sheep later in the quincho. So the controlled production on the agricultural side is considered based on studies, done by ourselves and the state, with INTA. 
 [21:31.4] Those are the specialists in all these kind of scientific research on pastures. 
 **Interviewer:** [22:00.8] It's hot [under the sun]. 
 **Interviewer:** [22:30.6] I believe it was in 1993 if I recall correctly when you opened to agro-tourism, how has life in this estancia changed? How is life different?  
 [23:00.6] Benji asking [Adolfo corrects: 1990-1]. 
 [23:18.5] When we began with tourism in 1990-1991, that is the season, we decided to make a transformation of the activity, considering the guidlines set by the National Park. And we became much more tilted towards tourism, rather than cattle. As much as we changed the production from sheep to cow, the overall quantity decreased very much. 
 [23:53.9] So from the research done on pastures here, we could have 1500 cattle heads, but we only have 480. So the grass is over abundant. But it's important to, agreeing with the guidelines, it was preferable to have a rationalized pasture, controlled, to maintain the native species along with the foreign ones. 
 [24:30.6] From then on we started to do tourism. And what we offer the tourist is that they come to have an experience of a typical Patagonian estancia, of a Croatian that came over here when there was nothing at all. So, without consideration of the restaurant at the quincho, where the asado is eaten, the rest of the buildings are just the same as my grandfather had.
 [25:05.3] The only thing that we do is to maintain them. The shearing warehouse is just as he made it. We have in tourism two products. One is the people to come over to lodge at the inn. And the inn is my grandparents house. The only thing that we did was, that since it had five rooms, we added five more.
 [25:33.8] But the windows, are built with the same lenga wood that my grandfather used. The floor was made of lenga, and pinotea. So we seeked for these materials in antique stores, and in houses under demolition. The furniture are the same old ones, only that we have considered the acoustics, and heat, so that tourists coming over can enjoy, without the cold of 80 years ago. 
 [26:04.6] Reality is that this first product is for people to come and enjoy as it was 80, 90 years ago. The house that my grandfather is the same than what the people in the inn can experience. 
 [26:34.1] With those modifications I just mentioned. So this people that comes over here and sleep two or three nights, go out over here. On Ruta 15, that comes from Calafate, up to here, which are 56 kilometers, the road ends here. So when one advances the 12,000 hectares inwards, you only get there walking. 
 [27:00.5] So we have walks, trekking, bicycle rides, horse rides. There are no vehicles, with the exception of controls, or logistics, that we use a vehicle eventually. Because we have the second product, aside from the inn, which is that people come to do horse rides of 4 or 5 days, 
 [27:30.1] sleeping in the posts that had cattle activity 50-100 years ago. They sleep there, use horses, with bilingual guides, if required, and sleep in each one of the posts and get to know places that are unique: glaciers that you can only reach by foot,
 [28:02.6] that are inside the PNLG. So people have these days with vehicles that come over up to here. Another product that we have is that people who are visiting Calafate can have a day in the countryside. We have a vehicle ourselves that brings the people over. And we do specific activities, rural.
 [28:31.4] They arrive, we offer them a tea time treat. The bilingual guide tells them the estancia's history, about the National Park, and takes them through a walk to the Southern branch of Lago Argentino and Lago Roca, showing the local flora and fauna. They have a shearing demonstration. 
 [29:00.4] So that they can see the activity that was carried on for years during populating times. There is a try-out [prueba de rienda], which is the local skill [destreza criolla] between two horses, with two gauchos who run dodging drums, to show the skill of the horse [caballo criollo] which is the breed that has worked in Patagonia the most, even in Argentina overall. And later on is a short horse ride [cabalgata] of 45 minutes up to an hour. 
 [29:32.4] And it all ends eating the typical Patagonian sheep in the asador [grill], with salads made of our own garden. With house made desserts. Every morning we milk the cows and prepare the local dulce de leche, and home made flan, with our own milk. Milked be it December 31, Xmas, labor day: 
 [30:02.9] the cows get milked every day, and that is another activity that urban people have never seen. Of course that later on they go through the sterilization process, so that it goes through the conditions necessary for consumption. So if you have a milk and coffee you get it, or tea with milk, or the cakes, and the eggs that we use, with our chickens. 
 [30:32.6] So the idea, summing up, is that the touristic activity can live an experience in a Patagonian estancia, founded 108 years ago. 
 **Interviewer:** [30:52.9] Are you hopeful that this place will be still here, still as beautiful in 80 years from now? 
**ADOLFO:** [31:15.1] Well. I am 58 years old. If I am going to live another 80 years I guarantee that this will remain as it is. I have two other daughters that are continuing the job. One is working with me, in Calafate who is in charge of all the human resources of the business. In this estancia 27 people work.  
 [31:46.2] She leads all the commercialization. We maintain, try to maintain all the buildings just the same as we had them 106 years ago. And we try to, and we living along with the National Park. We understand that it is the best choice that we could have had. 
 [32:14.5] As much as we have the right in the National Park law, to continue staying in place, we have to go on with the blood line of the family. So my grandfather came over, then my father, now I do, my children should go on, or my cousins, in the activity. We were the first to put even in winter, all this Cordón Cristal gathers a lot of snow and we have a hydroelectric dam, 
 [32:50.6] with which we generate our own clean energy but it ends by the mid of December and we begin to use the Diesel motors. But right now we have made an investment to try to complete or at least advance in using totally renewable energies.  
 [33:20.2] To not use any more ... We already achieved during 8 months. Because the dam which comes from a chorrillo, we have this dam with a tube that takes water, with a 100 meter vertical fall, from where we take the water through the tubes, and in front of the shearing building, there is a small house which has the hydroelectric turbine that generates energy good enough for 8 months of the year.  
 [33:50.4] Now we are putting, next week, a series of solar panels so that in summer we can compensate that energy. And the idea is that in the short term we could not use Diesel fuel anymore. That it could be totally with renewable energy. So, stay calm that for another 80 years if I'm here this will remain as it is.
 [34:22.9] Because there are no kind of developments, nor vehicles. All over here there is extensive tourism. So that you can get an idea: in the inn there's not more than 800 people over the year. So this is maintained with a very high degree of conservation. 
 **Interviewer:** [34:58.0] Some years ago, he did a project very related to what you are commenting on, that was about the technological possibilities so that people could remove themselves from the grid of services provided by the state, electricity and the rest of basic services, and it seems that this is quite covered here. 
**ADOLFO:** [35:28.6] Yes!! Unfortunately, in our country the last administrations that we've had, over the last 50 years, they didn't worry about this when it should have been a concern. To be able to use this sun, the wind we have, and to use all the electricity with alternative renewable energies. 
 [36:00.4] And not to use petroleum. That only brings economic problems when the price of the oil barrel rises and the economies tremble. Here, thanks to God, we do all this with an effort that is totally private, of our own. We do not have any kind of support, be it from the provincial, national state. We create an hydroelectric turbine and solar panels before the administration of PN.  
 [36:36.2] [Team Checking wrap up]
 [37:03.0] For some people in English this could mean salvage, or rural, silvester, depending on what you want to point out: be it the fauna, the flora, what is out of control, or what is natural, with it's own rhythm. 
 [37:43.5] Is this place wild? 
**ADOLFO:** [37:49.0] Yes. I believe so. This is a place, even though it wouldn't seem so, rural, tough. Over here, in winter ... But well, this is contrasted with the nice it is: the calmness. Each one's consciousness, of what each one likes on this planet that we have. I am happy to be in these places. And there are people who love the city. And they feel themselves abandoned, alone. 
 [38:23.2] But I say that in these places you have everything. Just being here gives you a mental well being. But yes, they are rugged places. 
 [38:49.5] [Checking for any other question ...]
**ADOLFO:** [38:49.5] Have you already visited Perito Moreno? [Benji: Yesterday and the day before. Tomorrow perhaps.] ADOLFO: Do you know about the history of the glaciar's advancements? 
 [39:18.2] I can show you a video that I have, a photographic research that my grandfather had. He never saw the process of the advancement of the Perito Moreno glaciar, that went over the peninsula and generated a dam. All of these river branches from the Southern side grown, because their natural destiny is onto the North Side. Lago Argentino and Río Santa Cruz, they go to the Atlantic. 
 [39:53.3] So the first advancement of Glaciar Perito Moreno that made the obstruction was in 1939. So, I have very old pictures in which all of this had not yet been flooded. I built up a video with a photographer with quite extensive experience and relevance in Argentina, who's made books and so on. And we built this to explain to tourists of what it was before. 
 [40:30.4] And how the floods came over. You can see the amount of trees, when the water is covering the trees. The different posts that my grandfather had established, once in one place and had to be replaced because the water would go over and take them away. At the maximum of the rising river branch of Lago Argentino along with the Southern branch, the difference was of 34 meters high.
 [41:00.5] In some places, where it's flat, it covered up to 15 kilometers of pastures. In other places, where it is more of cliffs, that would be less. Here you can see perfectly well, over there in front up to where the water reached. Up to where you can see the borderline of the trees. Up to there is where the highest that the river got. 
 [41:30.5] So if you like I can show you this in video. I invite you over to my home to watch that, from 1919 to nowadays. Compared pictures from that mountain. Some pictures ... The father of all this is Pascasio Perito Moreno. 
 [42:03.6] But then the second that has went through this place the most was the Father Dagostini. He took a picture in 1929 from over up there, before any of the river risings. And we compared that with a current picture from the same location. And we prepared all this to explain to people why ... Once you know about the breaking of the Perito Moreno, and for people to see the icebergs falling down, with all their thunder, but there is a whole explanation, 
[42:39.0] and a lot of consequences, which were all from this side. Because on the North side of Lago Argentino has it's own drain in Santa Cruz. On the other side of Lago Calafate, you can see a little bit of that water that closes for two, three or four years with a growing water through this dam. When it brakes: that water goes away in a single day. It's impressive. So if you like, and see it, to know about the culture and history of the place you visited. 
 **Interviewer:** [43:23.2] I would love too see it. If we have time. 
