‘Running Adrifts: The Memory of Water’ interview by Elisa Herrera Altamirano {#running-adrifts-the-memory-of-water-interview-by-elisa-herrera-altamirano .clip_info-header}
============================================================================

2018-11-06 [4 days ago]{.clip_info-time}

This is an interview from Elisa Herrera Altamirano's project ‘Running
Adrifts: The Memory of Water’, for RUN! RUN! RUN! Biennale 2018
\#r3fest: Dangerous Movements. Video by Elisa Herrera and Capicúa
MovLab.
[facebook.com/capicuamovlab/](https://www.facebook.com/capicuamovlab/)

Elisa Herrera Altamirano has a background in Psychology, Gender Studies
and Anthropology. She is a research-runner and a casual-runner.
Interested in the Posthuman Ethics and Propositions, her PhD thesis
explored how the practice of running enhances or diminishes the
capacity/potential of bodies to relate/become (with) the world in its
diverse human and non-human materialities. Through ethnographic
fieldwork (including running interviews), she explores the relationship
between bodies and cities, and proposes the figuration of the ‘continuum
bodycity’ that serves as an analytical lens of continuity among bodies
and environments. Elisa looks at running as a feminist methodology that
considers the body as part of the ethnographic experience that generates
situated knowledge.

Elisa co-founded ‘Capicúa MovLab’ in 2017. This is a social laboratory
that is interested in the exploration of the politics of emplaced bodies
through movement. The main idea of exploration and action is guided by
the potential of moving bodies as activist bodies within the
environment. The first intervention of Capicúa was in Querétaro City,
Mexico. This was entitled ’Running Adrifts: The Memory of Water’. Elisa
and other runners followed the course of the hydraulic system. This
performs running as not just a ‘mobilities method’, ‘practice-led
research’ or ‘action research’, but what she calls ‘action vehicle’ and
‘activist vehicle’, to raise awareness and ‘response-ability’ (Büscher
2015) to the non-human world. In other words the proposal aims to shed
light to the understanding of human bodies in relational ways, using
running as a vehicle for social action. In this clip, Elisa is
interviewed while running. She talks about what they learned after
running 15K, and the possibilities to work together with other
professionals in urban planning and design to engage with urban
sustainability from the perspective of the moving body.

KEYWORDS: Running, action vehicle, drift, adrift, ethnographic
experience, situated knowledge, hacking, co-creation,
response-abilities, research runner, amateur runner, bodycity, movement,
mobilities, dangerous movements, art movement, RUN! RUN! RUN!, r3fest,
runrunrunart, practice-led research, practice, art practice, Aalto
University, Kent University, barefoot running, minimalist running,
winter, texture, affect, feeling, sensation, marginal, folk, mainstream,
cultures, running cultures

--------------\
The RUN! RUN! RUN! Biennale \#r3fest is a bi-annual interdisciplinary
programme exploring running as an arts and humanities discourse. Founded
in 2014 by artist-curator Dr Kai Syng Tan and geographer Professor Alan
Latham (UCL), it is characterised by ‘productive antagonisms’ (Latham
and Tan 2017) in its activation of running as a methodology and metaphor
to connect and disrupt across disciplinary and other borders (Tan 2018)
, as well as its ‘positive atmosphere’ (Guardian 2014). The RUN! RUN!
RUN! Biennale \#r3fest 2018 is held in exile this year in Paris. Hosted
by University of Kent’s Paris School of Arts and Culture (PSAC), this
will take place as a workshop on 8 November. The theme is a timely and
juicy ‘Dangerous Movements’. Set against our precarious situation today
(Brexit, closed borders, the anthropocene et al), and with special
attention paid to the Parisien/European mise-en-scene, \#r3fest 2018
invites us to think about mobilities and the (end to the?) freedom of
movement today, how that relates to art movements like Situationism and
the historical boundary-crossing foot messenger, as well as creative
steps towards re-making the world around us and what running and
‘Running Studies’ could contribute to this. \#r3fest is co-curated by
Kai (Artangel Open 100, ASEAN Para Games Ceremonies 2015) based in
King’s College London, with author Dr Vybarr Cregan-Reid (Primate Change
2018, Footnotes 2016), who is a Reader in English & Environmental
Humanities in the School of English at the University of Kent.

The University of Kent’s Paris School of Arts and Culture is a
specialist postgraduate centre in one of the most culturally rich cities
in the world. We offer advanced, flexible degrees across the arts,
including in architecture, history of art, film, drama and literature,
with modules that capitalise on the city's vast heritage and culture.
[kent.ac.uk/paris/](https://www.kent.ac.uk/paris/)

TM + © 2018 Vimeo, Inc. All rights reserved.
