The Best Running Documentaries 
==============================

Binge these great films about running that will get you motivated to get
out the door.

By [Tom Layman](/author/216971/tom-layman/){.byline-name}

Aug 17, 2018

It’s hard to find anything simpler than firing through episode after
episode of old sitcoms or wiping out chunks of time with random movies
on Netflix or Amazon Prime. Then there are the documentaries you never
thought you’d be interested in, but can’t stop watching.

For runners, there are other chunks of time when it is a perfect to get
their binge on with a great documentary, like while recovering on the
couch after a long run or when cranking out miles on the
[treadmill](https://www.runnersworld.com/treadmills/){.body-link} at
home.

And if you’re looking for the right kind of motivation to get out the
door, a bevy of running documentaries exist that hit just the right tone
of inspiring and gripping.

We collected a list of documentaries, some more well-known and others,
to get you in the spirit of putting one foot in front of the other. Find
the film that’s best for you, and enjoy.

### Into the Wind 

Follow the journey of [Terry
Fox](https://www.runnersworld.com/runners-stories/a20783824/terry-foxs-marathon-of-hope/){.body-link},
an amputee runner who was diagnosed with cancer, as he attempted to run
across Canada in 1980. The film premiered in 2010 as part of the 30 for
30 series on ESPN. The filmmakers (one of which was NBA legend Steve
Nash) spoke with those closest to Fox as he set out to cover more than a
marathon distance each day in hopes of raising awareness and money for
cancer research. Fox was was just 21 years old at the time, and although
it’s a true story and easy to find out what happened to the young
Canadian, we won’t play spoiler about how it ends.\
[Rent or
Buy](https://www.amazon.com/30-for-Season-1/dp/B008ZZQCNQ){.body-btn-link}

### Ultramarathon Man: 50 Marathons, 50 States, 50 Days 

[Dean
Karnazes](https://www.runnersworld.com/author/210997/dean-karnazes/){.body-link}
is arguably the most famous ultramarathoner in the history of the sport.
In 2008, the documentary *Ultramarathon Man: 50 Marathons, 50 States, 50
Days*, chronicled the feat that really put him on the map (maybe
literally since he did kind of run around the country). The documentary
is more than just Karnazes’ journey. Regular people and runners join him
in different cities as he makes his tour of the nation, and you get a
sense of what running means to everyone.\
[Buy
Now](https://www.amazon.com/Ultramarathon-Man-Marathons-States-Days/dp/B001LRTTCG){.body-btn-link}

### Hood to Coast {#hood-to-coast .body-h3}

Runners who have ever wanted to participate in the Hood to Coast relay,
one of the largest of its kind in the world, might want to take a peek
at the 2011 documentary about this popular race in Oregon. The relay is
approximately 200 miles long and features more than a thousand 12-person
teams, and the film chronicles four groups who ran in the 2008 race.
[Grab 12 of your closest running
buddies](https://www.runnersworld.com/races-places/a20799868/how-to-run-an-overnight-relay-race/){.body-link},
watch the film, and sign up. But it’s a very popular race, so don’t
hesitate.\
[Rent or
Buy](https://www.amazon.com/Hood-Coast-Alberto-Salazar/dp/B006HBAET8){.body-btn-link}

### Boston: The Documentary {#boston-the-documentary .body-h3}

\

This newer documentary, released right before the running of the 121st
[Boston
Marathon](https://www.runnersworld.com/boston-marathon/){.body-link},
chronicles everything from the origins of one of the world’s most iconic
races to the tragedy in 2013 at the finish line. It’s a complete look at
everything Boston Marathon from some the people who know it best. The
film is narrated by Boston’s own [Matt
Damon](https://www.runnersworld.com/news/a20860859/matt-damon-finished-a-half-marathon-sunday/){.body-link}.\
[Buy
Now](https://www.amazon.com/Boston-Matt-Damon/dp/B07989QN2F){.body-btn-link}

### The Barkley Marathons: The Race That Eats Its Young {#the-barkley-marathons-the-race-that-eats-its-young .body-h3}

\
The name says it all, chronicling one of the most brutal races that only
a handful of brave souls can actually try. For years, the [Barkley
Marathons](https://www.runnersworld.com/news/a20851948/crazy-tough-only-one-person-officially-finishes-barkley-marathons/){.body-link}
was a race that nobody talked about. You had to know somebody who knew
how to enter to even have a chance at entry. This documentary gives a
great look at the trials and tribulations that a small number of runners
put themselves through each year, and why the race director, Gary
Cantrell, designed the devilish race in the first place.\
[Rent or
Buy](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B017Y43P3S/){.body-btn-link}

**RELATED:** [23 Social Media Posts That Show How Insane the Barkley Marathons Is](https://www.runnersworld.com/news/a20851957/23-social-media-posts-that-show-how-insane-the-barkley-marathons-is/)

### Run For Your Life {#run-for-your-life .body-h3}

Learn about the man who made the [New York City
Marathon](https://www.runnersworld.com/marathon/){.body-link} what it is
today. [Fred
Lebow’s](https://www.runnersworld.com/content/fred-lebow/){.body-link}
life and work are brought to the screen to describe how he turned the
[New York Road Runners
Club](https://www.runnersworld.com/content/new-york-road-runners/){.body-link}
from a small group of men running in the Bronx to a group that oversees
the biggest marathon in the world that crosses all five boroughs of New
York City. The film came out in 2008.\
[Rent or
Buy](https://www.amazon.com/Run-Your-Life-Neil-Amdur/dp/B001NVNAKM/){.body-btn-link}

### Spirit of the Marathon {#spirit-of-the-marathon .body-h3}

The film follows six runners, including American legend [Deena
Kastor](https://www.runnersworld.com/content/deena-kastor/){.body-link}
and Kenyan elite Daniel Njenga, through their training and lead-up to
the 2005 [Chicago
Marathon](https://www.runnersworld.com/marathon/){.body-link}. You get a
great look at how top runners train and mentally prepare for 26.2 miles,
but you also see how regular folks prepare for their own big races. For
anyone thinking about signing up for the marathon, this is a great,
first-person look at what it’s like to put in the four months of work
before race day. A follow-up documentary, [Spirit of the Marathon
2](http://amzn.to/2sYvnOb){.body-link}, follows runners as they prepare
for the Rome Marathon.\
[Rent or
Buy](https://www.amazon.com/Spirit-Marathon-Dick-Beardsley/dp/B001IKWT50/){.body-btn-link}

### Gun Runners {#gun-runners .body-h3}

This is a human-interest piece following two Kenyan runners—Julius Arile
and Robert Matanda—who put aside their life as countryside warriors to
focus on the sport. Director and filmmaker Anjali Nayar debuted this
documentary in 2015. It shows how Kenyan runners go from poverty to
reaching local and national fame in the sport. But it also displays just
how hard it is to make it big in a country full of talented runners.\
[Buy
Now](https://www.amazon.com/Gun-Runners-Julius-Arile/dp/B075TXVTMW/){.body-btn-link}

### **Fifty: The Movie** 

Follow Mal Law’s attempt to run 50 mountain marathons over 50 peaks in
50 days around New Zealand in 2015. Law made a name for himself in his
home country when he would take on daring feats to raise money for
different charitable organizations. For this particular adventure, you
get to see just what the body goes through when traversing such an
intense terrain for that many days. ([Buy or download it at
fiftythemovie.co.nz](http://www.fiftythemovie.co.nz/){.body-link}.)

### **Karl Meltzer: Made to be Broken** {#karl-meltzer-made-to-be-broken .body-h3}

Famed ultrarunner Karl Meltzer is followed in his journey to [run the
Appalachian Trail in record
time](https://www.runnersworld.com/news/a20823004/ultrarunner-karl-meltzer-celebrates-appalachian-trail-record-with-filet-mignon/){.body-link}.
Red Bull sponsors this documentary, and they document Meltzer’s third
and final attempt at breaking the course record, set by [Scott
Jurek](https://www.runnersworld.com/content/scott-jurek/){.body-link} in
2015. While it’s probably not a good idea to attempt the feat after
watching the film, you will definitely be motivated to get your feet wet
and dirty on a trail right afterward. ([Watch the whole film on
Redbull.tv](https://www.redbull.tv/film/AP-1QJ5RKYGN1W11/made-to-be-broken){.body-link}
or watch it on Netflix.)

**RELATED:** [Ultrarunner Karl Meltzer Celebrates Appalachian Trail
Record with Filet
Mignon](https://www.runnersworld.com/news/a20823004/ultrarunner-karl-meltzer-celebrates-appalachian-trail-record-with-filet-mignon/){.body-link}

### **Free to Run** {#free-to-run .body-h3}

This documentary looks at the rise of distance running in the last 50
years and focuses on some of the major runners and figures who have
helped shape the sport. Some of the subjects include [Steve
Prefontaine’s](https://www.runnersworld.com/content/steve-prefontaine/){.body-link}
mark on the running scene, the situation at the New York Marathon
shortly after Hurricane Sandy, and the growth of women’s running after
[Kathrine
Switzer](https://www.runnersworld.com/content/kathrine-switzer/){.body-link}
ran the Boston Marathon in 1967. The film came out in 2016.\
[Rent or
Buy](https://www.amazon.com/Free-Run-Kathrine-Switzer/dp/B01HMYSL8O/){.body-btn-link}

### **Showing Up** {#showing-up .body-h3}

Follow the lives of several [November Project
runners](https://www.runnersworld.com/runners-stories/a20794425/episode-4-the-motivating-power-of-november-project/){.body-link}
and athletes as they explain the reasons why they got into the
grassroots free fitness movement. The movie chronicles every day people
in cities like New York, Boston, Washington D.C., and Kansas City who
hold themselves accountable by showing up at 6:30 a.m. for workouts a
couple times a week. [Chris
Mosier](https://www.runnersworld.com/nutrition-weight-loss/a20843821/eat-like-an-elite-chris-mosier/){.body-link},
an elite duathlete who is transgender, plays a prominent role in the
film as a member of the group. You can watch the full documentary on
YouTube.

### **Desert Runners** {#desert-runners .body-h3}

If you are up for watching runners go through excruciating pain, then
this documentary of a group attempting to complete the 4 Deserts ultra
races is right up your alley. Each race for these amateur runners is a
little north of 150 miles and runs through the Atacama Desert, the Gobi,
the Sahara, and Antarctica. Brutal.\
[Rent or
Buy](https://www.amazon.com/Desert-Runners-Samantha-Gash/dp/B00H8A5IXY/){.body-btn-link}

### Breaking 2 {#breaking-2 .body-h3}

Nike’s Breaking2 project was the talk of the running world in 2017.
Relive the real-life running science project in this documentary,
presented by National Geographic. Three Nike runners, led by Eliud
Kipchoge, tackle the Italian race track in Monza in an effort to do the
impossible in marathoning—break the two-hour mark for the first time in
history. Nike announced he Breaking2 Project late in 2016, and the film
goes through the year-long process it took to get to race day. The full
documentary is available on YouTube.

### Transcend {#transcend .body-h3}

[Learn more about the life of 2012 Boston Marathon winner Wesley
Korir](https://www.thefilmtranscend.com/){.body-link} on and off the
roads as a politician in Kenya. Korir went from professional runner to
marathon winner to elected official in the Kenyan parliament. The film
gives a deeper look at the man, and how he used that major win in Boston
to give back to his countrymen and women.

******

-   [Runners Stories](/runners-stories/){.seo-link}
-   [Best Running
    Movies](https://www.runnersworld.com/runners-stories/g20708975/best-running-movies-ever-made/ "Best Running Movies"){.seo-link}
-   [Best Running
    Songs](https://www.runnersworld.com/runners-stories/a20865567/best-running-songs/ "Best Running Songs"){.seo-link}
-   [Motivational Quotes About
    Running](https://www.runnersworld.com/runners-stories/a20866664/motivational-quotes-about-marathons/ "Motivational Quotes About Running "){.seo-link}
-   [Running Documentary Wins Film Fest
    Award](//www.runnersworld.com/news/a20808270/running-documentary-wins-film-fest-award/ "Running Documentary Wins Film Fest Award "){.seo-link}
-   [Get Motivated! Six Running Documentaries Guaranteed to
    Inspire](//www.runnersworld.com/training/a20824384/get-motivated-six-running-documentaries-guaranteed-to-inspire/ "Get Motivated! Six Running Documentaries Guaranteed to Inspire"){.seo-link}
-   [Documentary: The Perfect
    Runner](//www.runnersworld.com/training/a20826373/documentary-the-perfect-runner/ "Documentary: The Perfect Runner"){.seo-link}
-   [motivation](/content/motivation/){.seo-link}
-   [fun](/content/fun/){.seo-link}


[A Part of Hearst Digital Media]{.footer-network-tagline} [ Runner's
World participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means
we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased
through our links to retailer sites. ]{.footer-affiliate-disclosure}

©2018 Hearst Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
