  ---------------------
  Director of Product
  Sports Reference
  USA / Remote
  ---------------------

Dear Adam Darowski,

I am aiming for the User Experience Researcher role.

I'm very interested in being part of a Product team, and I believe my
mixed background may serve you well. I'm a Sociologist and am now
finishing my studies as a Systems Analyst.

For the past 3 years, I've been working in the tech industry with global
teams remotely and async. I trained as a backend developer for a season:
the team taught me Agile practices, working as an independent and
autonomous nucleus producing meaningful outcomes periodically.

As a technical writer, I worked closely with the talent and marketing
teams: interviewing regularly with developers as subject matter experts,
I valued their knowledge and the relationships they opened up to me, so
this triggered me to aim and foster further these kinds of
conversations.

Later, I worked as a Project Manager close to the Development and QA
teams, and UX: an interesting, challenging, and satisfactory role, since
the team builds and sees hand-offs to the end-users thru quick
iterations. I have grown from technical positions to more hands-on
roles, with ever more contact with several stakeholders, such as CEOs,
users, and clients; aiming to deliver solid and timely results, focusing
on teamwork, building requirements, preparing budgets, prototyping and
making the best use of time. I also developed a hunger for a product
vision, and understanding users closely with testing and continual
rapport.

I should clarify my background as a Sociologist: I gained a Masters'
scholarship to study urban art in Brazil. There I trained observation,
interviewing, and building hypothesis and testing it with the public. I
believe that my background as a sociologist gives me an awareness of all
sides' needs, and fits me well for interviews, research, and testing; I
also enjoy prototyping, wireframing, and attending to User Experience
[UX], all of which I hope help to deliver great products, and
enjoyment with final results for all parties.

Thank you for taking the time to consider my credentials.
Sincerely yours,

Benjamin Juarez

PS. I am an American living in Argentina and am flexible in work hours
and salary. If you want to reach me through WhatsApp you can text me at
+5493513 104043. Also, I love sports, I've run my whole life, and am
currently interested in ultra-running. As a side note, some may not
consider chess a sport, but I enjoy playing, studying, and training; I
recently did well in a local tournament.
