Affect Theory and the New Age of Anxiety {#affect-theory-and-the-new-age-of-anxiety .ArticleHeader__hed___GPB7e}
========================================

How Lauren Berlant’s cultural criticism predicted the Trumping of politics. {#how-lauren-berlants-cultural-criticism-predicted-the-trumping-of-politics. .ArticleHeader__dek___2rbDs}
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

By [Hua Hsu](/contributors/hua-hsu "Hua Hsu"){.Link__link___3dWao}

March 18, 2019


Lauren Berlant sees all politics as sentimental, trailing a fantasy of
the good life.


In October, 2011, the literary scholar and cultural theorist Lauren
Berlant published “[Cruel
Optimism](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0822351110/?tag=thneyo0f-20){.ArticleBody__link___1FS03},”
a meditation on our attachment to dreams that we know are destined to be
dashed. Berlant had taught in the English Department at the University
of Chicago since 1984. She had established herself as a skilled
interpreter of film and literature, starting out with a series of
influential, interlinked books that she called her “national
sentimentality trilogy.” A sense of national identity, these books
argued, wasn’t so much a set of conscious decisions that we make as it
was a set of compulsions—attachments and identifications—that we feel.
In “Cruel Optimism,” Berlant moved from theorizing about genres of
fiction to theorizing about “genres for life.” We like to imagine that
our life follows some kind of trajectory, like the plot of a novel, and
that by recognizing its arc we might, in turn, become its author. But
often what we feel instead is a sense of precariousness—a gut-level
suspicion that hard work, thrift, and following the rules won’t give us
control over the story, much less guarantee a happy ending. For all
that, we keep on hoping, and that persuades us to keep on living.

The persistence of the American Dream, Berlant suggests, amounts to a
cruel optimism, a condition “when something you desire is actually an
obstacle to your own flourishing.” We are accustomed to longing for
things that we know are bad for us, like cigarettes or cake. Perhaps
your emotional state is calibrated around a sports team, like the New
York Knicks, and despite hopes that next season will be better you
vaguely understand that you’ll be let down anyway. But our Sisyphean
pursuit of the good life has higher stakes, and its amalgam of fantasy
and futility is something that we process as experience before we
rationalize it in thought. These feelings, Berlant says, are the “body’s
response to the world, something you’re always catching up to.”

“Cruel Optimism” was dense and academic, but it proved enormously
influential. Its timing was serendipitous. The book was published at a
moment when Barack Obama could still credibly draw upon “the audacity of
hope,” and, with a second term in sight, people wondered if he would
finally unleash the progressive will that many believed lingered deep
inside him. Those who opposed him continued to work themselves into a
radical frenzy, as the Republican mainstream reoriented itself around
the Tea Party. Berlant tuned in to a wider sense of disaffection—the
feeling among average voters that neither of these visions for change
was really about them, or for them. According to Berlant, these
suspicions manifested themselves in mundane ways: hoarding things or
overeating might be attempts to overcome feelings of personal
powerlessness. And her affective framework was a means of understanding
larger manifestations of these suspicions, too: the Occupy movement,
which began in September, 2011, could be seen as a response to the cruel
optimism of capitalism, the pent-up outrage of citizens realizing that
they’d been chasing nothing more than a dream.

In the years that followed, Berlant’s interest in the immediacy of what
others call “felt experience” helped explain why people were feeling
increasingly unsteady. It was as though they were in relationships that
lacked reciprocity. Her work, like the school of thought that had
produced it, was attentive to the buffeting emotional weather of
everyday life: consider our Twitter-fed swings of anger and mirth, the
oversharing and moodiness ascribed to younger generations, the paranoia
stoked by proliferating conspiracy theories, even the emergence of the
eternally sad pop star. Shortly after the publication of “Cruel
Optimism,” Berlant began to sense a subtle, atmospheric disturbance. In
September of 2012, she offered a diagnosis on her blog:

> Many of you would say that Donald Trump was excluded from the
> Republican convention, has no traction as a political candidate, and
> is generally viewed as a clown whose spewing occasionally hits in the
> vicinity of an opinion that a reasonable person could defend. But I am
> here to tell you that he actually won the Republican nomination and is
> dominating the airwaves during this election season. He is not doing
> this with “dark money” or Koch-like influence peddling. He has done
> this the way the fabled butterfly does it, as its wing-flapping sets
> off revolutions.

data-callout="inset-left">


[](https://www.newyorker.com/cartoon/a22255){.Link__link___3dWao
.CartoonEmbed__captionLink___14pNW}





![](https://media.newyorker.com/cartoons/5c89514c7622202cdb7d7404/master/w_727,c_limit/190325_a22255.jpg)




<span
class="ImageCaption__caption___1EOQO ImageCaption__caption___1EOQO">“As
a gesture of good faith, my client is offering the large ball of rubber
bands inside the ‘random stuff’ drawer.”</span>

class="SocialShare__socialShare___92Ene SocialShare__grey___dItUm CartoonEmbed__socialShare___13L3P">

[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoon%2Fa22255&display=popup&ref=plugin){.Link__link___3dWao
.SocialShare__link___Sad7k
.SocialShare__facebook___Jm71k}[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoon%2Fa22255&text=A%20New%20Yorker%20Cartoon&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoon%2Fa22255){.Link__link___3dWao
.SocialShare__link___Sad7k
.SocialShare__twitter___3O6QA}[](mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20New%20Yorker%20Cartoon&body=%E2%80%9CAs%20a%20gesture%20of%20good%20faith%2C%20my%20client%20is%20offering%20the%20large%20ball%20of%20rubber%20bands%20inside%20the%20%E2%80%98random%20stuff%E2%80%99%20drawer.%E2%80%9D%0D%0Ahttps%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoon%2Fa22255){.Link__link___3dWao
.SocialShare__link___Sad7k
.SocialShare__email___TlCif}[](https://condenaststore.com/conde-nast-brand/cartoonbank){.Link__link___3dWao
.CartoonEmbed__shop___1TDi0}





Berlant felt Trump’s spectral presence everywhere, his bluster mimicked
and channelled by the Party establishment. Though hardly a man of
nuance, he had tapped into the subtleties of affective politics. She
called it “the Trumping of Politics.”



Literary criticism used to be centered on meaning. The critic
interrogated a poem or a passage, and applied her preferred theory of
how meanings were produced and where they could be found. A New Critic
might have scrutinized form and irony, explicating the interplay between
overt and actual meaning; a deconstructionist might have been attuned to
the way the metaphors and propositions in a passage undermined each
other; a historicist to the way the meanings of a text might be situated
within larger political or social tensions. For each, the task was
interpretation, and the currency was meaning. In the past couple of
decades, however, a different approach has emerged, claiming the rubric
“affect theory.” Under its influence, critics attended to affective
charge. They saw our world as shaped not simply by narratives and
arguments but also by<span data-page="page_2"></span> nonlinguistic
effects—by mood, by atmosphere, by feelings.

The so-called affective turn was propelled, in no small part, by a
series of essays, starting in the mid-nineteen-nineties, by the late Eve
Kosofsky Sedgwick, who had become fascinated by the work of the
psychologist Silvan Tomkins. He had identified nine primary “affects,”
some positive (interest, enjoyment), most negative (anger, fear, shame,
disgust, “dissmell”), one neutral (surprise). Tomkins—who had a
background in theatre—believed that people acted toward one another
according to social scripts. We could achieve peace or happiness by
understanding how the scripts worked and by avoiding situations that
triggered negative affects. But literary critics like Sedgwick were less
interested in figuring out how to make people better than in
understanding why we feel the way we do.

During the two-thousands, affect theory became one of the dominant
paradigms of literary studies, and a bridge to other fields, notably
social psychology, anthropology, and political theory. Scholars like
Sara Ahmed, Sianne Ngai, and Ann Cvetkovich began exploring the
emotional contours of life during increasingly precarious times. They
were circling around a kind of overstimulated numbness, considering
everything from what it meant to call something “interesting”—a hedge
against actual judgment—to the relationship between economic anxiety and
mental health. In “[Ugly
Feelings](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0674024095/?tag=thneyo0f-20){.ArticleBody__link___1FS03}”
(2005), Ngai published a “bestiary of affects,” including animatedness,
envy, irritation, paranoia, and the combination of shock and boredom
that she called “stuplimity.” Other affect theorists noted that, amid a
sense of dawning futility, many people seem to derive their greatest
pleasure from making others feel bad; disaffection and disillusionment
are contagions we can spread ourselves.

Berlant roots her version of affect theory less in works of psychology
than in works of Marxist thought, especially those of Raymond Williams,
who, back in the nineteen-fifties, wrote of the “structure of feeling.”
He was trying to describe how we come to agree on social or cultural
conventions—the intuitive, pre-ideological sense a cohort has that one
version of the future is feasible while another is not. Berlant, in
turn, sought to chronicle “dramas of adjustment” that have overtaken the
postwar, boom-time conceptions of the good life, and that might “force
into being new recognitions of what a life is and ought to be.”

The draw of the American Dream, in her view, has always been its
seductive invitation to fuse one’s “private fortune with that of the
nation.” When she began teaching at the University of Chicago, in the
mid-eighties, [Ronald
Reagan](https://www.newyorker.com/tag/ronald-reagan){.ArticleBody__link___1FS03}
spoke confidently of a “morning in America,” and the American story of
postwar prosperity still seemed possible. General skepticism about
meritocracy and opportunity, felt most acutely by marginalized groups
who couldn’t see themselves in picket-fence campaign ads, had yet to go
mainstream. Berlant saw the contradictions within the public realm
played out in sentimental fiction. These works were often seen as
unserious because of their appeal to emotion and their focus on the
domestic sphere, and yet they could move people to act.

In sentimental fiction, we encounter righteous solutions to problems
that feel unresolvable in real life. Berlant held that American popular
culture had been built, layer by layer, from “[Uncle Tom’s
Cabin](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0393059464/?tag=thneyo0f-20){.ArticleBody__link___1FS03}”
to “The Simpsons,” upon the assumption that identifying with “someone
else’s stress, pain, or humiliated identity” could change you. “Popular
culture relies on keeping sacrosanct this aspect of sentimentality—that
‘underneath’ we are all alike,” she observed.

Everyone has heartstrings. Over time, she wrote, we had grown addicted
to having them pulled, rather than focussing on what the pulling could
accomplish by way of political change. We’d replaced tangible action
with affective experience. “What does it mean for the theory and
practice of social transformation,” she asked in a 1999 essay, “when
feeling good becomes evidence of justice’s triumph?” Somewhere along the
way, *doing* good had come to seem irrelevant—or maybe just felt
impossible.



In 2002, Berlant helped found the Feel Tank Chicago—her version of that
ubiquitous vehicle of policymaking the think tank. The collective
consisted of academic colleagues, artists, and activists who sought to
take “the emotional temperature of the body politic.” It functioned both
as a support network and as a strategy workshop for “political
depressives.” Underneath the playful conceit was the very serious
possibility that politics was essentially theatre, and that it was
basically impossible to opt out of one’s part in it. As Berlant later
wrote, in “Cruel Optimism,” “The political depressive might be cool,
cynical, shut off, searingly rational or averse, and yet, having adopted
a mode that might be called detachment, may not really be detached at
all, but navigating an ongoing and sustaining relationship to the scene
and circuit of optimism and disappointment.”

We dream of swimming toward a beautiful horizon, but in truth, Berlant
evocatively observed, we are constantly “dogpaddling around a space
whose contours remain obscure.” What stories do we tell ourselves in
order to stay afloat? In December, 2007, she started a blog called
[Supervalent
Thought](https://supervalentthought.com/){.ArticleBody__link___1FS03},
dedicated to slowing the world down, zooming in on its mundanities. Some
of its most bewitching posts had a voyeuristic intimacy, cataloguing
interactions on city streets or in coffee shops, scrutinizing nonverbal
cues, gestures, and fleeting expressions—the traces of affect that
litter our daily lives.

In one post, Berlant recounts an argument between a cashier and an angry
customer at a convenience store. The customer leaves in a huff but
forgets his credit card, and the “aggrieved” yet duty-bound cashier
rushes out after him,<span data-page="page_3"></span> hoping to get his
attention with an unusually loud whistle—the kind “that you know
requires your fingers.” When the cashier returned, Berlant complimented
him on his technique. “He told us a story about elementary school,” she
wrote. “He said he had had a math teacher who insulted and shamed him.
One day she was using him as an example, and he just put his fingers in
his mouth and blew.” It was an experience that couldn’t be easily
distilled into lesson; it endured as a lingering affect. Berlant was
interested in the “atmosphere” of scenes like these, acted out by
dispirited characters in search of a plot.

“[The
Hundreds](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1478002883/?tag=thneyo0f-20){.ArticleBody__link___1FS03}”
(Duke), Berlant’s latest book, co-written with Kathleen Stewart, an
anthropologist at the University of Texas at Austin, grows out of these
short writing exercises. Each entry is an experiment in “following out
the impact of things” in a hundred words, or a multiple of a hundred
words.

data-callout="inset-left">


[](https://www.newyorker.com/cartoon/a22662){.Link__link___3dWao
.CartoonEmbed__captionLink___14pNW}





![](https://media.newyorker.com/cartoons/5c89514cdfbc452c90377e04/master/w_727,c_limit/190325_a22662.jpg)




<span
class="ImageCaption__caption___1EOQO ImageCaption__caption___1EOQO">“Five-second
rule!”</span>

class="SocialShare__socialShare___92Ene SocialShare__grey___dItUm CartoonEmbed__socialShare___13L3P">

[](https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoon%2Fa22662&display=popup&ref=plugin){.Link__link___3dWao
.SocialShare__link___Sad7k
.SocialShare__facebook___Jm71k}[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoon%2Fa22662&text=A%20New%20Yorker%20Cartoon&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoon%2Fa22662){.Link__link___3dWao
.SocialShare__link___Sad7k
.SocialShare__twitter___3O6QA}[](mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20New%20Yorker%20Cartoon&body=%E2%80%9CFive-second%20rule!%E2%80%9D%0D%0Ahttps%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoon%2Fa22662){.Link__link___3dWao
.SocialShare__link___Sad7k
.SocialShare__email___TlCif}[](https://condenaststore.com/conde-nast-brand/cartoonbank){.Link__link___3dWao
.CartoonEmbed__shop___1TDi0}





The result is a strange and captivating book. It is an inventory of what
Berlant and Stewart call “ordinaries,” which arise from encounters with
the world that are “not events of knowing, units of anything, or
revelations of realness, or facts.” They are records of affect,
meditations, manifestos, and prose poems. There are entries on smoothies
and weird encounters at the liquor store, digressions on selfies, yoga,
and capitalism, a reference to the TV show “[Search
Party](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/12/19/a-millennial-private-eye-on-search-party){.ArticleBody__link___1FS03}”
and the real-estate app Zillow. The authors sift through the detritus of
the American Dream—the symptoms of cruel optimism. Men at the local deli
seem to suspect that life is “a set of roadblocks cooked down to a
rage.” One particularly haunting page recounts an argument that the
narrator had with a neighbor over a urinating dog. Another woman walks
by, trying to calm the author down and bring her “back to the good.”
“His words were spitballs; hers were gently bouncing tennis balls. He
was a rage machine; she was a sympathy machine, but she seemed so tired,
too, and I could only imagine why.”

In Berlant and Stewart’s hands, affect theory provides a way of
understanding the sensations and resignations of the present, the
normalized exhaustion that comes with life in the new economy. It is a
way of framing uniquely modern questions: Where did the seeming surplus
of emotionality that we see on the Internet come from, and what might it
become? What new political feelings were being produced by the
rudderless drift of life in the gig economy? What if millennials were
unintelligible to their parents simply because they have resigned
themselves to precariousness as life’s defining feature?

A lot of affect theory is abstruse to the point where you forget that it
aims to describe basic facets of everyday reality. Stewart’s books have
been a notable exception, interweaving diaristic observation and
everyday reportage with critical theory. The sentences in Berlant’s
previous books and articles tended to be very long, conveying the
sweeping complexity of her ideas. But she seems invigorated by the
neurotic limitations of this form, which produces a kind of frenzied
poetry. “The Hundreds” calls to mind the adventurous, hybrid style of
Fred Moten (the book includes a brief poem by him), Maggie Nelson, or
Claudia Rankine, all of whom bend available literary forms into workable
vessels for new ideas. Berlant leans into the wit and vulnerability on
the edges of her previous work. “There is nothing I love more than
watching someone use their freedom,” she writes. “I’ll coast in awkward
transit, family meals, and acrid sex to get next to a freedom. I’ll
fling myself at ordinary monsters if in the crevasse of the mistake I
get next to a freedom. We bear each other hoping to breathe in each
other’s freedom.”

The most penetrating moments of “The Hundreds” occur when the authors
meditate on what it means to write about life in the first place. Their
efforts end up telling us something about what it means to assess our
lives without giving up on ourselves: “We make a pass at a swell in
realism, and look for the hook. We back up at the hint of something. We
butt in. We try to describe the smell; we trim the fat to pinpoint what
seems to be the matter here.” It’s like an asymptote, moving toward but
never arriving at the point of convergence. This is, of course, the
geometry of cruel optimism—the endless chase for a destination you’ll
never reach. It’s tiring work: “When writing fails the relation of word
and world, it spins out like car wheels in mud, leaving you stranded and
tired of trying.”



“All attachment is optimistic,” Berlant argued in “Cruel Optimism,”
because it forces us out of ourselves. From there, we enter “into the
world in order to bring closer the satisfying something that you cannot
generate on your own but sense in the wake of a person, a way of life,
an object, project, concept, or scene.” The challenge is finding
configurations that don’t simply reproduce the same old patterns of
life.

There’s a stirring moment, at the end of “Cruel Optimism,” when Berlant
writes about the book’s cover image, a painting that depicts the artist
and disability activist Riva Lehrer lying beside her dog, Zora. Lehrer
seems to float behind Zora, her hand covering her face. Zora is blind in
one eye and wears a<span data-page="page_final"></span> cone around her
neck. They are, by conventional standards, limited and vulnerable
beings. But, to Berlant, they are a “team.” They “seem at peace with
each other’s bodily being, and seem to have given each other what they
came for: companionship, reciprocity, care, protection.” In the absence
of real stability—the state of affairs that we must come to terms
with—there is still the possibility of true solidarity, the experience
of “having adventures and being in the impasse together, waiting for the
other shoe to drop, and also, allowing for some healing and resting,
waiting for it not to drop.”

In moments like these, Berlant’s work can feel strangely and *kindly*
optimistic. What’s moving about her reading of Lehrer’s painting is this
awareness of the boundaries between these bodies, as well as the
atmosphere they nevertheless share. Maybe relinquishing or recalibrating
our fantasies of the good life doesn’t lead to absolute darkness. It can
simply be a matter of coming to grips with different possibilities of
communion, figuring out who benefits from our collective weariness. The
political backdrop that inspired “Cruel Optimism” seems quaint compared
with the divisiveness of the present. But attentiveness to affect
encourages us to imagine ourselves beyond the present: even if feelings
of exhaustion, indifference, or disillusionment may have been
naturalized, that doesn’t mean they’re natural.

“No one wants to be a bad or compromised kind of force in the world, but
the latter is just inevitable,” Berlant once wrote in a short essay on
her personal credos. “The question is how to develop ways to accentuate
those contradictions, to interrupt their banality and to move them
somewhere.” We can build worlds out of these small ambitions. We
continue to write, even if it occasionally feels as though we were
spinning our wheels, and we continue to live, even if it means giving up
the certainty that our story is going to end the way we want it to.
Writing on her blog a few years ago, Berlant issued what she described
as her collective’s secret motto: “*We refuse to be worn out*.” ♦





<span class="ArticleDisclaimer__articleDisclaimer___2kCNX">This article
appears in the print edition of the [March 25,
2019](/magazine/2019/03/25), issue, with the headline “That Feeling
When.”</span>


class="Avatar__avatar___1_uRc ArticleContributors__bioAvatar___11Nu0">

[](/contributors/hua-hsu){.Link__link___3dWao}

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/59097b7d1c7a8e33fb39020e/1:1/w_130,c_limit/hsu-hua.png)



-   Hua Hsu is a staff writer at The New Yorker and the author of “[A
    Floating Chinaman: Fantasy and Failure Across the
    Pacific](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0674967909/?tag=thneyo0f-20).”

    [Read more »](/contributors/hua-hsu){.Link__link___3dWao
    .ArticleContributors__contributorBioLink___3ifgZ}



-   [Apple News Opt In](/tag/apple-news-opt-in){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Apple News Paid](/tag/apple-news-paid){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Apple News Preview](/tag/apple-news-preview){.Link__link___3dWao}


data-cns="cns-slot-end-of-article">





Never miss a big *New Yorker* story again. Sign up for This Week’s Issue
and get an e-mail every week with the stories you have to read.


Submit

















### Most Popular {#most-popular .RecirculationMostPopular__title___zwZ4R}

-   <span class="RecirculationMostPopular__counter___3YFww">1.</span>

    <span class="RecirculationMostPopular__rubric___29E94">Dept. of
    Justice</span>[](/magazine/2019/05/06/michael-cohens-last-days-of-freedom){.Link__link___3dWao}
    ##### Michael Cohen’s Last Days of Freedom {#michael-cohens-lastdaysof-freedom .RecirculationMostPopular__hed___1Yugq}


    By [Jeffrey
    Toobin](/contributors/jeffrey-toobin "Jeffrey Toobin"){.Link__link___3dWao}



-   <span class="RecirculationMostPopular__counter___3YFww">2.</span>

    <span class="RecirculationMostPopular__rubric___29E94">Under
    Review</span>[](/books/under-review/david-brooks-conversion-story){.Link__link___3dWao}
    ##### David Brooks’s Conversion Story {#david-brookss-conversion-story .RecirculationMostPopular__hed___1Yugq}


    By [Benjamin
    Wallace-Wells](/contributors/benjamin-wallace-wells "Benjamin Wallace-Wells"){.Link__link___3dWao}



-   <span class="RecirculationMostPopular__counter___3YFww">3.</span>

    <span class="RecirculationMostPopular__rubric___29E94">On
    Television</span>[](/culture/on-television/game-of-thrones-season-8-episode-3-recap-the-stab-heard-round-the-world){.Link__link___3dWao}
    ##### “Game of Thrones” Season 8, Episode 3 Recap: The Stab Heard Round the World {#game-of-thrones-season-8-episode-3-recap-the-stab-heard-round-the-world .RecirculationMostPopular__hed___1Yugq}


    By [Sarah
    Larson](/contributors/sarah-larson "Sarah Larson"){.Link__link___3dWao}



-   <span class="RecirculationMostPopular__counter___3YFww">4.</span>

    <span
    class="RecirculationMostPopular__rubric___29E94">Profiles</span>[](/magazine/2019/05/06/john-bolton-on-the-warpath){.Link__link___3dWao}
    ##### John Bolton on the Warpath {#john-bolton-on-the-warpath .RecirculationMostPopular__hed___1Yugq}


    By [Dexter
    Filkins](/contributors/dexter-filkins "Dexter Filkins"){.Link__link___3dWao}



-   <span class="RecirculationMostPopular__counter___3YFww">5.</span>

    <span
    class="RecirculationMostPopular__rubric___29E94">Puzzles Dept.</span>[](/crossword/puzzles-dept/2019/04/29){.Link__link___3dWao}
    ##### The Weekday Crossword: Monday, April 29, 2019 {#the-weekday-crossword-monday-april-29-2019 .RecirculationMostPopular__hed___1Yugq}


    By [Patrick
    Berry](/contributors/patrick-berry "Patrick Berry"){.Link__link___3dWao}



[<span>our thirty most
popular</span>](/popular?intcid=most-popular){.Link__link___3dWao
.RecirculationMostPopular__more___q6L9B
.RecirculationMostPopular__more___q6L9B}









class="ArticlePageSidebar__railItem___1K-hs ArticlePageSidebar__last___2Ciro">









-   [](https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fmagazine%2F2019%2F03%2F25%2Faffect-theory-and-the-new-age-of-anxiety&display=popup&ref=plugin){.Link__link___3dWao}


-   [](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fmagazine%2F2019%2F03%2F25%2Faffect-theory-and-the-new-age-of-anxiety&text=Affect%20Theory%20and%20the%20New%20Age%20of%20Anxiety&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fmagazine%2F2019%2F03%2F25%2Faffect-theory-and-the-new-age-of-anxiety){.Link__link___3dWao}


-   [](mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20Affect%20Theory%20and%20the%20New%20Age%20of%20Anxiety&body=How%20Lauren%20Berlant%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20criticism%20predicted%20the%20Trumping%20of%20politics.%C2%A0%0D%0Ahttps%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fmagazine%2F2019%2F03%2F25%2Faffect-theory-and-the-new-age-of-anxiety){.Link__link___3dWao}


-   [](#){.Link__link___3dWao}








class="section RecirculationRecommendedStories__recommended___3KI8A">

data-track-type="recirc" data-track-location="mod-related"
data-service="none, parsely" data-source="parsely">

##### Recommended Stories {#recommended-stories .RecirculationRecommendedStories__header___y7h0R}


data-track-type="recircItem" data-track-location="mod-related"
data-service="tbd" data-source="curated" data-track-position="0">

[](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/03/07/critics-in-the-age-of-opinion){.Link__link___3dWao
.RecirculationRecommendedStories__image___3M88v}

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/5909747cc14b3c606c10860a/4:3/w_620,c_limit/160307_r27762.jpg)


[Books](/magazine/books "Books"){.Link__link___3dWao
.Rubric__rubric___3hrQE
.RecirculationRecommendedStories__rubric___2phUL}[](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/03/07/critics-in-the-age-of-opinion){.Link__link___3dWao}
Critics in the Age of Opinion {#critics-in-the-age-of-opinion .RecirculationRecommendedStories__hed___3cnVL}
-----------------------------

How to be a reviewer when everybody reviews. {#how-to-be-a-reviewer-when-everybody-reviews. .RecirculationRecommendedStories__dek___1rygJ}
--------------------------------------------

By [Nathan
Heller](http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/nathan-heller "Nathan Heller"){.Link__link___3dWao}

<span class="RecirculationRecommendedStories__timestamp___1YE3P">Feb.
29, 2016</span>


data-track-type="recircItem" data-track-location="mod-related"
data-service="tbd" data-source="curated" data-track-position="1">

[](/magazine/2018/02/05/martin-amis-style-supremacist){.Link__link___3dWao
.RecirculationRecommendedStories__image___3M88v}

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/5a6a0da3b302760aa3db4eb3/4:3/w_620,c_limit/180205_r31422.jpg)


[Books](/magazine/books "Books"){.Link__link___3dWao
.Rubric__rubric___3hrQE
.RecirculationRecommendedStories__rubric___2phUL}[](/magazine/2018/02/05/martin-amis-style-supremacist){.Link__link___3dWao}
Martin Amis, Style Supremacist {#martin-amis-style-supremacist .RecirculationRecommendedStories__hed___3cnVL}
------------------------------

Few writers are as rapt and rigorous in their celebration of prose. {#few-writers-are-as-rapt-and-rigorous-in-their-celebration-of-prose. .RecirculationRecommendedStories__dek___1rygJ}
-------------------------------------------------------------------

By [Thomas
Mallon](http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/thomas-mallon "Thomas Mallon"){.Link__link___3dWao}

<span class="RecirculationRecommendedStories__timestamp___1YE3P">Jan.
29, 2018</span>




data-track-type="recircItem" data-track-location="mod-related"
data-service="tbd" data-source="parsely" data-track-position="0">

[](/magazine/2019/05/06/michael-cohens-last-days-of-freedom){.Link__link___3dWao
.RecirculationRecommendedStories__image___3M88v}

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/5cc36dcb5168f1027f348733/4:3/w_620,c_limit/190506_r34260.jpg)


<span
class="Rubric__rubric___3hrQE RecirculationRecommendedStories__rubric___2phUL">Dept.
of
Justice</span>[](/magazine/2019/05/06/michael-cohens-last-days-of-freedom){.Link__link___3dWao}
Michael Cohen’s Last Days of Freedom {#michael-cohens-lastdaysof-freedom-1 .RecirculationRecommendedStories__hed___3cnVL}
------------------------------------

Michael Cohen’s last days of freedom. {#michael-cohens-last-days-of-freedom. .RecirculationRecommendedStories__dek___1rygJ}
-------------------------------------

By [Jeffrey
Toobin](/contributors/jeffrey-toobin "Jeffrey Toobin"){.Link__link___3dWao}

<span class="RecirculationRecommendedStories__timestamp___1YE3P"></span>


data-track-type="recircItem" data-track-location="mod-related"
data-service="tbd" data-source="parsely" data-track-position="1">

[](/books/under-review/david-brooks-conversion-story){.Link__link___3dWao
.RecirculationRecommendedStories__image___3M88v}

![](https://media.newyorker.com/photos/5cb607e4e27f633cc9d655d7/4:3/w_620,c_limit/BWW-DavidBrooks-edit-social.jpg)


<span
class="Rubric__rubric___3hrQE RecirculationRecommendedStories__rubric___2phUL">Under
Review</span>[](/books/under-review/david-brooks-conversion-story){.Link__link___3dWao}
David Brooks’s Conversion Story {#david-brookss-conversion-story-1 .RecirculationRecommendedStories__hed___3cnVL}
-------------------------------

In recent years, the conservative columnist has divorced, remarried, broken with Republicans over Trump, and explored Christianity. How deep was his transformation? {#in-recent-years-the-conservative-columnist-has-divorced-remarried-broken-with-republicans-over-trump-and-explored-christianity.-how-deep-was-his-transformation .RecirculationRecommendedStories__dek___1rygJ}
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

By [Benjamin
Wallace-Wells](/contributors/benjamin-wallace-wells "Benjamin Wallace-Wells"){.Link__link___3dWao}

<span class="RecirculationRecommendedStories__timestamp___1YE3P">Apr.
29, 2019</span>














#### [Listen to the New Yorker Radio Hour](/podcast/the-new-yorker-radio-hour){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Buy the Cover](http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Covers-Prints_c147247_.htm){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Play the Crossword](/crossword){.Link__link___3dWao}

#### [Play the Jigsaw Puzzle](/jigsaw){.Link__link___3dWao}










#### [News & Politics](/news)

-   [Daily Comment](/news/daily-comment){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Our Columnists](/news/our-columnists){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [News Desk](/news/news-desk){.Link__link___3dWao}



#### [Culture](/culture)

-   [Cultural Comment](/culture/cultural-comment){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Culture Desk](/culture/culture-desk){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Goings On About Town](/goings-on-about-town){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [The Critics](/magazine/critics){.Link__link___3dWao}



#### [Business, Science & Tech](/business)

-   [Currency](/business/currency){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Elements](/tech/elements){.Link__link___3dWao}



#### [Humor](/humor)

-   [Daily Shouts](/humor/daily-shouts){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Shouts & Murmurs](/magazine/shouts-murmurs){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [The Borowitz Report](/humor/borowitz-report){.Link__link___3dWao}



#### [Cartoons](/cartoons)

-   [Daily Cartoon](/cartoons/daily-cartoon){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Cartoon Caption
    Contest](http://contest.newyorker.com/){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Cartoon
    Bank](https://condenaststore.com/conde-nast-brand/cartoonbank?utm_medium=referral){.Link__link___3dWao}



#### [Books & Fiction](/books)

-   [Page-Turner](/books/page-turner){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Books](/magazine/books){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Poems](/magazine/poems){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Fiction](/magazine/fiction){.Link__link___3dWao}



#### [Magazine](/magazine)

-   [This Week's Issue](/magazine){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Archive](/archive){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Subscribe](/subscribe){.Link__link___3dWao}



#### [Photography](/tag/photography)

-   [Photo Booth](/culture/photo-booth){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Portfolio](/magazine/portfolio){.Link__link___3dWao}



#### [Video](http://video.newyorker.com/)

-   [Culture](http://video.newyorker.com/genres/Culture){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Humor](http://video.newyorker.com/genres/Humor){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [News](http://video.newyorker.com/genres/News){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Politics](http://video.newyorker.com/genres/Politics){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Science &
    Tech](http://video.newyorker.com/genres/Science%20&%20Tech){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Sports](http://video.newyorker.com/genres/Sports){.Link__link___3dWao}



#### [Podcasts](/podcast)

-   [The New Yorker Radio
    Hour](/podcast/the-new-yorker-radio-hour){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Political Scene](/podcast/political-scene){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [The Writer's
    Voice](/podcast/the-authors-voice){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Fiction](/podcast/fiction){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Poetry](/podcast/poetry){.Link__link___3dWao}



#### More

-   [Customer
    Care](http://w1.buysub.com/servlet/CSGateway?cds_mag_code=NYR){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Buy the
    Cover](http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Covers-Prints_c147247_.htm){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Apps](/digital-editions){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Crossword Puzzle](/crossword){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Jigsaw Puzzle](/jigsaw){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [SecureDrop](https://projects.newyorker.com/securedrop/){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Store](http://www.condenaststore.com/~/new-yorker-store){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [RSS](/about/feeds){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Site Map](/sitemap){.Link__link___3dWao}



#### [Newsletters](https://www.newyorker.com/newsletters)

-   [The
    Daily](https://www.newyorker.com/newsletters/daily-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [The New Yorker
    Recommends](https://www.newyorker.com/newsletters/culture-review-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Daily
    Humor](https://www.newyorker.com/newsletters/send-me-the-cartoon-chronicle-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [John
    Cassidy](https://www.newyorker.com/newsletters/john-cassidy-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [The Borowitz
    Report](https://www.newyorker.com/newsletters/andy-borowitz-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Amy Davidson
    Sorkin](https://www.newyorker.com/home/about/sign-up-for-amy-davidson-sorkins-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Midterms
    2018](https://www.newyorker.com/home/about/sign-up-for-the-new-yorker-midterms-2018-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Food](https://www.newyorker.com/home/about/sign-up-for-the-new-yorker-food-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [UK](https://www.newyorker.com/home/about/sign-up-for-the-new-yorkers-uk-newsletter){.Link__link___3dWao}



#### [About Us](/about/us)

-   [About](/about/us){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Careers](/about/careers){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Contact](/about/contact){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [FAQ](/about/faq){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Media
    Kit](http://www.condenast.com/brands/the-new-yorker){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Press](/about/press){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Accessibility
    Help](/about/accessibility-help/){.Link__link___3dWao}






SectionsNews & PoliticsCultureBusiness, Science & TechHumorCartoonsBooks
& FictionMagazinePhotographyVideoPodcastsMoreNewsletters



AboutCareersContactFAQMedia KitPressAccessibility Help





#### Follow Us





<span role="img" aria-label="copyright icon">©</span> 2019 Condé Nast.
All rights reserved. Use of and/or registration on any portion of this
site constitutes acceptance of our [User
Agreement](https://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy){.Link__link___3dWao}
(updated 5/25/18) and [Privacy Policy and Cookie
Statement](https://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy){.Link__link___3dWao}
(updated 5/25/18). [Your California Privacy
Rights](https://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy-california){.Link__link___3dWao}.
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed,
transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written
permission of Condé Nast. *The New Yorker* may earn a portion of sales
from products and services that are purchased through links on our site
as part of our affiliate partnerships with retailers. [Ad
Choices](http://www.condenast.com/online-behavioral-advertising-oba-and-how-to-opt-out-of-oba/#clickheretoreadmoreaboutonlinebehavioraladvertising(oba)){.Link__link___3dWao}




Our sitesAllureArs TechnicaBackchannelBon AppétitBridesCondé Nast
TravelerEpicuriousGlamourGolf DigestGolf WorldGQGQ
StylePitchforkSelfStyleTeen VogueThe New YorkerThe SceneVanity
FairVogueWWired

















[Sign in](https://account.newyorker.com){.Link__link___3dWao}


[Shop](http://www.condenaststore.com/~/new-yorker-store?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=SHOP&AID=1247905545){.Link__link___3dWao
.UserInfo__shop___20W-I}




-   [News](/news){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Culture](/culture){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Books](/books){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Business & Tech](/business){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Humor](/humor){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Cartoons](/cartoons){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Magazine](/magazine){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Video](http://video.newyorker.com){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Podcasts](/podcast){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Archive](/archive){.Link__link___3dWao}
-   [Goings On](/goings-on-about-town){.Link__link___3dWao}




class="NewsletterSignup__newsletter___QS2Rl NewsletterSignup__mobile___15OuC">


Get the best of *The New Yorker* in your in-box every day.




Submit




[Privacy
Policy](https://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy){.Link__link___3dWao}




role="button" tabindex="0">













