<span>The Heart of a Swimmer vs. the Heart of a Runner</span> {#link-45dfb649 .css-fnr6md .e1h9rw200 itemprop="headline"}
=============================================================

Regular exercise changes the look and workings of the human heart. And
researchers are discovering that different sports affect the heart
differently.

By [<span class="css-1baulvz" itemprop="name">Gretchen
Reynolds</span>](https://www.nytimes.com/by/gretchen-reynolds){.css-1riqqik
.e1jsehar0}

-   April 3, 2019


Do world-class swimmers’ hearts function differently than the hearts of
elite runners?

A new study finds that the answer may be yes, and the differences,
although slight, could be telling and consequential, even for those of
us who swim or run at a much less lofty level.

Cardiologists and exercise scientists already know that regular exercise
changes the look and workings of the human heart. The left ventricle, in
particular, alters with exercise. This chamber of the heart receives
oxygen-rich blood from the lungs and pumps it out to the rest of the
body, using a rather strenuous twisting and unspooling motion, as if the
ventricle were a sponge being wrung out before springing back into
shape.

Exercise, especially aerobic exercise, requires that considerable oxygen
be delivered to working muscles, placing high demands on the left
ventricle. In response, this part of the heart in athletes typically
becomes larger and stronger than in sedentary people and functions more
efficiently, filling with blood a little earlier and more fully and
untwisting with each heartbeat a bit more rapidly, allowing the heart to
pump more blood more quickly.

While almost any exercise can prompt remodeling of the left ventricle
over time, different types of exercise often produce subtly different
effects. A [2015 study found, for
instance](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26361851){.css-1g7m0tk},
that competitive rowers, whose sport combines endurance and power, had
greater muscle mass in their left ventricles than runners, making their
hearts strong but potentially less nimble during the twisting that pumps
blood to muscles.

</div>

</div>

<div class="css-1fanzo5 StoryBodyCompanionColumn">

<div class="css-53u6y8">

These past studies compared the cardiac effects of land-based
activities, though, with an emphasis on running. Few have examined
swimming, even though it is not only a popular exercise but unique.
Swimmers, unlike runners, lie prone, in buoyant water and hold their
breaths, all of which could affect cardiac demands and how the heart
responds and remakes itself.

So, for the [new study, which was published in November in Frontiers in
Physiology](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphys.2018.01700/full){.css-1g7m0tk},
researchers at the University of Guelph in Canada and other institutions
set out to map the structure and function of elite swimmers’ and
runners’ hearts.

The researchers focused on world-class performers because those athletes
would have been running or swimming strenuously for years, presumably
exaggerating any differential effects of their training, the researchers
reasoned.

Eventually they recruited 16 national-team runners and another 16
comparable swimmers, male and female, some of them sprinters and others
distance specialists.

They asked the athletes to visit the exercise lab after not exercising
for 12 hours and then, when on site, to lie quietly. They checked heart
rates and blood pressures and finally examined the athletes’ hearts with
echocardiograms, which show both the structure and functioning of the
organ.

</div>

</div>

<div class="css-1fanzo5 StoryBodyCompanionColumn">

<div class="css-53u6y8">

It turned out, to no one’s surprise, that the athletes, whether runners
or swimmers, enjoyed enviable heart health. Their heart rates hovered
around 50 beats per minute, with the runners’ rates slightly lower than
the swimmers’. But all of the athletes’ heart rates were much lower than
is typical for sedentary people, signifying that their hearts were
robust.

The athletes also had relatively large, efficient left ventricles, their
echocardiograms showed.

But there were interesting if small differences between the swimmers and
runners, the researchers found. While all of the athletes’ left
ventricles filled with blood earlier than average and untwisted more
quickly during each heartbeat, those desirable changes were amplified in
the runners. Their ventricles filled even earlier and untwisted more
emphatically than the swimmers’ hearts did.

In theory, those differences should allow blood to move from and back to
the runners’ hearts more rapidly than would happen inside the swimmers’.

But these differences do not necessarily show that the runners’ hearts
worked better than the swimmers’, says Jamie Burr, a professor at the
University of Guelph and director of its human performance lab, who
conducted the new study with the lead author, Katharine Currie, and
others.

Since swimmers exercise in a horizontal position, he says, their hearts
do not have to fight gravity to get blood back to the heart, unlike in
upright runners. Posture does some of the work for swimmers, and so
their hearts reshape themselves only as much as needed for the demands
of their sport.

The findings underscore how exquisitely sensitive our bodies are to
different types of exercise, Dr. Burr says.

They also might provide a reason for swimmers sometimes to consider
logging miles on the road, he says, to intensify the remodeling of their
hearts.

</div>

</div>

<div class="css-1fanzo5 StoryBodyCompanionColumn">

<div class="css-53u6y8">

Of course, the athletes here were tested while resting, not competing,
he says, and it is not clear whether any variations in their ventricles
would be meaningful during races.

The study also was cross-sectional, meaning it looked at the athletes
only once. They might have been born with unusual cardiac structures
that somehow allowed them to excel at their sports, instead of the
sports changing their hearts.

Dr. Burr, however, doubts that. Exercise almost certainly remakes our
hearts, he says, and he hopes future experiments can tell us more about
how each activity affects us and which might be best for different
people.

But even now, he says, “an important message is that all of the athletes
showed better function than a normal person off the street, which
supports the message that exercise is good for hearts.”

A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D4 of the New
York edition with the headline: Different Strokes for Athletic
Hearts<span>. [Order Reprints](http://www.nytreprints.com/) | [Today’s
Paper](http://www.nytimes.com/pages/todayspaper/index.html) |
[Subscribe](https://www.nytimes.com/subscriptions/Multiproduct/lp8HYKU.html?campaignId=48JQY)</span>
