  ----------------
  Hiring Recruiter
  Intelletec 
  USA / Remote
  ----------------

Dear Oliver Lauder,

I am aiming for the Product Manager role.

For the past 3 years, I've been working in the tech industry with global
teams remotely and async. I trained as a backend developer for a season:
the team taught me Agile practices, working as an independent and
autonomous nucleus producing meaningful outcomes periodically.

As a technical writer, I worked closely with the talent and marketing
teams: interviewing regularly with developers as subject matter experts,
I valued their knowledge and the relationships they opened up to me, so
this triggered me to aim and foster further these kinds of
conversations.

Later, I worked as a Project Manager close to the Development and QA
teams, and UX: an interesting, challenging, and satisfactory role, since
the team builds and sees hand-offs to the end-users thru quick
iterations. I have grown from technical positions to more hands-on
roles, with ever more contact with several stakeholders, such as CEOs,
users, and clients; aiming to deliver solid and timely results, focusing
on teamwork, building requirements, preparing budgets, prototyping and
making the best use of time. I also developed a hunger for a product
vision, and understanding users closely with testing and continual
rapport.


I'm very interested in being part of a Product team, and I believe my
mixed background may serve you well. I'm a Sociologist and am now
finishing my studies as a Systems Analyst. I should clarify my
background as a Sociologist: I gained a Masters' scholarship to study
urban art in Brazil. There I trained in observation, interviewing, and
building hypothesis and tested it with the public.



I believe that my background as a sociologist gives me an awareness of
all sides' needs, and fits me well for interviews, research, and
testing; I also enjoy prototyping, wireframing, and attending to User
Experience \[UX\], all of which I hope help to deliver great products,
and enjoyment with final results for all parties. My past experience has
showed me that I gain and enjoy good chemistry with developers,
teams, and clients; and I am looking forward to growing on this path.

Thank you for taking the time to consider my credentials. Sincerely
yours,

Benjamin Juarez

PS. I am an American living in Argentina and am flexible in work hours
and salary. If you want to reach me through WhatsApp you can text me at
+5493513 104043.
