What is Passive Income? - Smart Passive Income

#### [Passive Income 101](https://www.smartpassiveincome.com/passive-income-101/)

[]{#anchor}What is Passive Income?
==================================

Let's explore what passive income is all about.

I\'m Pat Flynn, and I\'m here to help you make more money, save more
time, and help more people too! Do you imagine what a new side business
(or even a new full-time business) could do for you? That\'s what I\'m
here to help you achieve.

Since 2008 I\'ve helped hundreds of thousands of people get started with
their own online business---and here\'s the common denominator: Everyone
starts from zero. So, if you\'re feeling behind---don\'t worry. I\'ll
catch you up quickly with what you need to know. Let\'s start with what
this thing called "passive income" really means, and is it even
possible?

### []{#anchor}What is Passive Income?

There are lots of definitions of *passive income*, and yes---I\'m aware
of traditional methods such as investing in real estate and in the
market. I do both of those, but that\'s not what this website is about.

In my experience, the best form of passive income---and what I focus on
here at SPI---is the following:

At Smart Passive Income, I teach you how to build online businesses that
take advantage of systems of automation that allow transactions, cash
flow, and growth to happen without requiring a real-time presence.

In other words, **we don't trade time for money**.

Instead, we entrepreneurs *invest our time upfront*, creating valuable
products and experiences that serve others, because that\'s really all a
good business does---it helps other people solve their problems.

We work hard now to continually reap the benefits later.

And unlike real estate or getting involved in the market, the barrier to
entry is much lower. There\'s far less money needed to invest, the
rewards can come in much faster, and what you create is something you
can become recognized for.

My first online business, which served the architecture and design
community, was created for only \$6.95/month, and within 18 months it
had generated over \$200,000! That\'s when I was hooked and I hope to
hook you too!

### []{#anchor}3 Passive Income Business Models

As you're learning, there's lots of ground to cover and I can't wait to
dive in with you. Let's begin with this video, where I explain three
different passive income business models. As you watch, take note of
which model best fits your goals.

### []{#anchor}The Types of Passive Income

Now let\'s get more specific. Here are three of my most popular podcast
episodes that go into detail about each type of passive income,
including which products and services you could potentially offer to
your audience. As you listen, ask yourself, "which of these product
types are most interesting to me?" Keep notes as you listen.

And really quick, I highly recommend you subscribe to my award-winning
weekly podcast below. I interview top people in the industry, including
people like Tim Ferriss and Gary Vaynerchuk, but I also interview
successful people that you\'ve never heard of---people who are just a
few steps ahead of you:

-   [Subscribe via iTunes](https://www.smartpassiveincome.com/itunes)
-   [Subscribe via
    Stitcher](https://www.stitcher.com/podcast/pat-flynn/the-smart-passive-income-podcast-online-business-blogging)

SPI fans tell me all the time how much these episodes helped them
understand the types of passive income opportunities that are out there.
I guarantee they'll help you too.

If you love the episodes, be sure to [subscribe to the SPI podcast on
iTunes](https://www.smartpassiveincome.com/itunes) to get new episodes
as they come out.

### []{#anchor}What Passive Income is NOT

Let's dispel some myths and set realistic expectations before we go any
deeper.

1.  **Generating passive income is NOT easy and it takes a lot of hard
    work.** Nothing in life comes easy. Making money online is no
    different. Many conventional internet marketers and online
    entrepreneurs will try to persuade you to think otherwise. Why?
    Because they're trying to make money from false hopes. I'm here to
    tell you the truth: Online business is hard. I'll do my best to
    guide you and give you the information you need, but I can't force
    you to take action; that's up to you.
2.  **Generating passive income does NOT happen overnight.** I don't
    live, teach, or believe in get-rich-quick schemes. My first online
    business took about a year of hard work before it was generating
    enough income to support my family. There was nothing easy about
    what I had to do to get that business going. But in relative terms,
    it was "quick" because I decided to opt-out of the
    work-till-sixty-five-deferred-life plan and make my own luck happen.
    You can do it too.
3.  **Generating passive income is NOT impossible.** Passive income was
    just a dream for me until 2008. That's when I was let go from my job
    due to the crumbling economy. With no other options, I bet on myself
    by trying to make my dream a reality. And you know what? The dream
    came true, and it's totally awesome! I get to stay at home with my
    family, work when I want, and make my own decisions. This lifestyle
    is possible, and I want you to experience it too.

### []{#anchor}How to Get Started with Passive Income

Now that you know what\'s up, you have three options:

**Option \#1: You could do nothing.** The truth is, when you do the same
ol\' things you\'ve always been doing, you\'re going to get the same
ol\' results---but I know you don\'t want that, or else you wouldn\'t be
here on this website and you wouldn\'t have gotten this far down the
page. This choice is obviously not yours.

**Option \#2: You could keep searching for more information on the
web.** There\'s a TON of information, good and bad, all over the place.
But why would you continue searching? All of the information you need to
get started I\'ve organized for you here on the blog, the podcast, and
other resources I\'ve created for you.

**Option \#3: You can take action now.** You can do it right now with
the free course I created called **Build Your Own Brand**. I built it
specifically for beginning entrepreneurs---like you---to make it easy to
figure out what your brand is going to be and how to build a website.
It\'s all in a lesson-by-lesson, easy-to-follow (even if you\'re scared
of technology), on-demand course. **It\'s free to access** right now,
and it\'ll show you just how easy getting started is, compared to what
you may expect.

Imagine having a website up and running in less than a week. It will
happen, but only if you get access to the course---and remember, it\'s
free. You have nothing to lose!

[Click here to sign
up](https://courses.smartpassiveincome.com/p/build-your-own-brand/) and
get instant access to my Build Your Own Brand course now!

[](https://courses.smartpassiveincome.com/p/build-your-own-brand)

![](Pictures/0.png){width="11.25in" height="6.375in"}

### []{#anchor}Build Your Own Brand

A Free 5-Day Challenge to Help You Build a Brand and Website You Can Be
Proud Of

Free

![](Pictures/1.png){width="280.0pt" height="281.0pt"}

by Pat Flynn

Learn More

### []{#anchor}Passive Income Business Essential \# 1---A website with blog

A website is the first essential of any profitable passive income
business done online.

There are a few free options like Blogger, Tumblr, or WordPress.com.
Those are great options for some, but I don't recommend that path for
three important reasons:

1.  **When you use a free service, your domain name will almost always
    be an "extra" extension to the service provider's own domain.** For
    example, if I created SPI on Tumblr, the web address would be
    http://smartpassiveincome.tumblr.com instead of
    https://www.smartpassiveincome.com.
2.  **You have fewer customization options for design, functionality,
    and revenue.** For example, I know that with free WordPress.com
    sites, you are limited to using only certain plugins, and you aren't
    allowed to advertise.
3.  **When you build your business on someone else's platform, your
    business is vulnerable to any changes they might make.** For
    example, if Tumblr closed tomorrow, you would lose your business
    entirely.

These three reasons alone are exactly why I recommend going with a
self-hosted website. You have more control, it looks more professional,
and you can truly call it your own. (For help setting up your website,
check out my free Build Your Own Brand course, mentioned above.)

### []{#anchor}Passive Income Business Essential \#2---A Podcast

Launching a podcast for Smart Passive Income was one of the smartest
business decisions I've ever made.

[Click here for my in-depth course on how to create and market a
podcast.](http://courses.smartpassiveincome.com/p/power-up-podcasting)

Why is podcasting so valuable to passive income online-based businesses?
Because with a podcast, you are literally speaking into the brain of
your fans---helping to educate and inspire them with your knowledge.
You'll forge a deeper connection with your audience than through
blogging alone.

Also, the podcast marketplace is far less saturated than the
blogosphere. That means you can stand out from the crowd easier if you
produce a high-quality show---which makes podcasting both a great
business launch strategy as well as a growth strategy.

Podcasts also become a route to building passive income. Down the road,
if your podcast performs well, you may be able to attract sponsors to
your show that you know, trust, and that add value to your listeners.
Such high-quality sponsors are another fantastic source of passive
income.

I only allow sponsors on my podcasts that I know from firsthand
experience and that share my values. You can also promote your own
products, as well as affiliate products that you trust.

### []{#anchor}I Appreciate You!

I'm here for you as both a guide and as a friend.

I want to hear your stories. I want to know how else I can help you. I
want the Smart Passive Income experience to be our experience, together.
That's how we all learn and grow together, including me.

I do my best to respond to emails. I treat everyone equally. And I
firmly believe that I'm not special, just a normal guy who enjoys
working hard and working smart. In everything I do here with Smart
Passive Income, I truly want to make the Internet a better place.

© Copyright 2019 Flynndustries, LLC All rights reserved.
