Rosanna Stevens: The Right Kind of Blood
========================================

[2014](https://hercanberra.com.au/cppeople/rosanna-stevens-the-right-kind-of-blood/)

**by Kaylia Payne**

![Rosanna Stevens Image 3 (Alternative profile) copy](http://hercanberra.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/Rosanna-Stevens-Image-3-Alternative-profile-copy.jpg)
Rosanna Stevens at In Canberra Tonight.

I’m not going to lie, when I first heard about Rosanna’s Stevens essay
[[**‘The Right Kind of
Blood’**]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}](http://theliftedbrow.com/post/87635778698/the-right-kind-of-blood-by-rosanna-stevens),
I was quite taken aback. ‘*Why on earth would anyone want to read about
periods? Yuk!’* I thought to myself before taking a deep breath, making
a cuppa and settling down to read something that I was sure would make
me fidget uncomfortably throughout.

While fidget I did, it was for entirely different reasons, as after
reading her piece it became apparent just how silly my initial reaction
had been. After all, I get my period. Yep, it’s true. I’m also going to
make a crazy assumption here and bet that you, or someone close to you,
does too. Yet despite the fact that it’s a part of many women’s lives,
there is still this idea that it has to be hidden away; almost as if one
should be ashamed of their reproductive system.

Rosanna’s piece is different from other articles that attempt to
challenge the current stigma around menstruation, as they usually try to
do so by painting periods as something far more fun than they are –
something we should celebrate loudly and proudly.

Now most people who get them will agree: periods are not fun. They’re
uncomfortable, sometimes very painful, and can come unexpectedly,
leading to embarrassing situations (c’mon admit it, we all have one
story at least). It is the acknowledgement of this that makes Rosanna’s
piece so powerful – she doesn’t try to dilute the realities of
menstruation.

While I can’t relate to the ‘yay, periods!’ articles, I can relate to
hers, as I’m sure many people will. Rosanna uses real stories from both
women and men to describe the everyday experience of menstruation in a
relatable and engaging way, in an attempt to bring these realities out
into public discussion and change the way periods are seen by society at
large.

After reading Rosanna’s essay, I snapped up the opportunity to chat with
her about the piece and discuss the reasons why she decided to break
away from the stigma and publicly discuss such a taboo topic.

**What prompted you to write the piece? Was there an ‘a-ha!’ moment or
was it an idea that had been forming for a while?**

There was an hilarious ‘a-ha!’ moment, and it came in the form of me
sitting on that bus, bleeding into a sock (before you get weirded out go
read the essay and then high-five me for my resourcefulness) in
stomach-exploding pain. I was sitting there after asking a bus driver
and a train officer for painkillers, getting nothing but completely
unreal advice, and then feeling ashamed of myself for having my period
(and not realising how ashamed I felt until a member of the public came
and spoke to me about my period like it was no big deal.)

I was pissed, and on the rest of the bus trip I wrote a Facebook
diatribe about how ridiculous it was that I felt so… I’m going to use
the word ‘oppressed’. It received *hundreds* of likes. I couldn’t
believe it: people who I hadn’t seen since high school, family members,
people who worked in government, who went to fundraisers in gorgeous
full-length sequinned numbers, who had babysat me as a noisy kid,
business owners and best friends all posted ‘Hell yeah!’ comments of
agreement. While I was still on the bus, the Editor in Chief of [The
Lifted Brow](http://www.theliftedbrow.com/), Sam Cooney, sent me an
email saying ‘Turn that comment into a full-length essay and send it to
me – it’s fantastic.’ So here we are. I didn’t think I’d ever write
about periods before that moment.

**Have you experienced any negative reactions to your essay, both during
the research/interview process and after publication?**

![rosie](http://hercanberra.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/rosie-300x255.jpg)
Rosanna with her two sisters.

I haven’t received any negative feedback so far. The only difficult
thing during the interview process was that some people wanted their
names changed – they’d have a brilliant story, but they’d want to keep
their cameo anonymous. That was difficult because the ultimate purpose
of the essay is about owning period stories honestly and challenging
that strange culture of being ashamed about periods.Yet some of these
people I was interviewing still felt shame in the public eye. That
really pushed me to include as many of my own embarrassing stories as
possible, and wear them.

My family have also been really fantastic in letting me make their lives
into stories. I should buy them all flowers – in fact, here’s a photo of
my two sisters and I – we all feature in the essay.

**Why do you believe periods are such a taboo topic? Do you believe that
the stigma around them will change in the near future, and if so, how?\
**

I wish I could say it’s because humans are weird about blood, but we’re
not. As I say in the essay, the video game Grand Theft Auto murders,
shoots, and rapes (yep, really!) its way into breaking a stack of world
records for most popular game, and meanwhile across town a t-shirt with
a bleeding vagina on it is taken off the market by American Apparel
because its deemed ‘gross’ and ‘man hating’. What?!**\
**

I’ve brought my dad, David, into this conversation because it’s way more
interesting if we talk about menstruation and include the perspective of
a non-menstruator: we all participate in the stigma.

Rosie: Hey Dad.

David: Hey, I was thinking about this while I was reading your essay. I
can’t draw a comparison in terms of the pain and discomfort, however in
terms of a taboo subject, try approaching your male friends and asking
them about masturbation/wanking. I suspect you will probably get a
similar response. It simply isn’t discussed, but every guy does it. I
guess it all comes under the guise of “self discovery”, and we are
taught that self discovery is something that is very personal.

On the other hand, both menstruation and masturbation are facts of life,
so the reasons for allocating them to the “taboo” list are fairly odd.
This may stem from religion (almost everything does). “What”, may you
ask, “does any of this have to do with religion?” Well, historically
(and currently), the lives of many, many people around the world are
governed by their religious faiths. I am not sure that you really want
to bring religion into the discussion, however!

Rosie: It is complicated (and religious), but just because something is
taboo doesn’t mean I should accept its status. It’s just as important
that women understand wet dreams and why people with penises wake up
with hard-ons if they sleep on their stomachs. I want to create an
environment where humans can feel comfortable talking about our bodies:
that’s when the taboo begins to fall apart. It blows my mind that it’s
common to fantasise about shopping for Apple products when workers and
the environment suffer so much for these precious slices of technology,
but western people can’t talk about the bodies we live in, and
experience the world through. Our bodies! We can’t escape our bodies –
so why not make having one a nice experience? I want the stigma to
change. I think it can. It starts with me.

**You mention men’s lack of knowledge about menstruation. I personally
have a husband who, despite my trying to show him one for the last few
years, still doesn’t know or care to know what a tampon looks like. Do
you think it’s important that men have an awareness about periods and
what they entail? If yes, how would you go about educating people who
don’t experience menstruation themselves and aren’t particularly
interested in learning about it?**

The essay speaks so much to this really important question. In terms of
periods and silence, can’t believe how much I learnt about the people I
loved because of their stories – and what I learnt wasn’t only about
menstruation, it was about how people I thought I knew reacted to the
world. There’s one story early on in the essay, about a friend of mine
who was terrified of getting her first period while lying in a hospital
bed with a two broken arms and a broken leg. She told me that story
sitting in Thai Chang Rai in Belconnen, at a dinner where I was meeting
her fiancée for the first time. She’d never shared that experience
before, and I knew her when she was going through the whole broken bones
saga in early-high school: it had never occurred to me that getting her
period would be a fear for her. That story changed the way I thought of
her surviving her first semester of high school in a wheelchair: it made
me wish I’d been a better friend. That’s what talking about these
‘taboo’ things is about. It’s about being a better partner, or better
friend, or parent, or human by knowing someone and all of their
experiences and vulnerabilities, and discovering a whole different
person you can say you truly know.

It’s important that both menstruators and non-menstruators have an
awareness of periods and what they entail: periods are so different for
everyone – often other menstruators and women don’t know what periods
are like for everyone else who bleeds. And here’s why it’s important to
change that awareness and awkwardness: I’ve had endometriosis my whole
life. Until last week, my ovaries were covered in cysts so large they
were stuck to my uterus. But because I didn’t share my experiences of
menstruation with other people (how really unusually painful it is, how
heavy it is, how I’ve created a really amazing drug cocktail for the
first day of my period that has probably turned my liver to swiss
cheese) I never realised that I really was having a worse period than
most people and there was a reason for it, until two months ago. I
mightn’t be able to have kids, and I came out of surgery with part of an
ovary missing: if I’d had a better awareness about periods because I was
unafraid to talk about them, I could have been diagnosed at fourteen,
and none of this would have happened! The amazing thing is, since I’ve
shared my endometriosis adventure, I’ve received a stack of emails from
men and women telling me about their experiences with endometriosis (as
people with endometriosis, brothers and sisters of people with
endometriosis, and partners of people with endometriosis) and these
stories helped me prepare for the surgery, and life afterwards. When you
throw your voice into a silence, it’s incredible how many people call
back.

The first step toward period normalcy is just being okay with it
yourself, despite others. It’s hard when you’re surrounded by people who
act as though you’re completely disgusting for saying the ‘p’-word, but
when I’m feeling really intimidated I think of this incredible poem by
International poetry slam champion [Dominique
Christina](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4vu2BsePvoI). She reminds me
that every person who shames me for my period forgets that their mothers
carried them cushioned and protected in the blood that they now disown:
that is how universal and biologically important periods are. So speak
up, I say. Leave your tampon packet on your bedside table. Remind people
where they came from.

**If your readers could only come away with one thing from your essay,
what would you like it to be?**

When people think of oppression they think of victims who proclaim
unfairness annoyingly, like that parent on Facebook who says things like
‘My mother in law just criticised my table setting and all the children
are vomiting and LIFE IS SO HARD WHEN YOUR SON HAS AN ABOVE-AVERAGE
READING ABILITY AND NOONE WILL GIVE HIM THE ADVANCED READERS’. We come
from this culture where to say things are unfair, or to say ‘I’m
oppressed’ is to be weak, and not get on with a job: it’s why we play
drinking games to count the number of times Italian soccer players feign
injuries dramatically. That parent on Facebook **does** initially make
me want to post a comment like, ‘I’m sorry your children go to school
without breakfast or lunch and will perform poorly due to the kind of
job you are restricted to because of your class or race!’ but I check
that response now. I think that parent is brave to put their feelings
out there for everyone to see what real life is like for them. That’s
what this essay is about in a lot of ways – saying, ‘oppression happens
in all these ways that you can laugh about and relate to and find
interesting – because that’s what life is like for someone.’

The most valuable thing a reader can come away with is this: You are not
alone living what is real for you. Not ever, whoever you are. I hope
this essay gives you the ability to smile at yourself, and talk to your
kids and your friends, and share your stories over whichever poison goes
down easiest at the end of a long day.

[Kaylia Payne](https://themanycoloursofhappiness.blogspot.com/)
---------------------------------------------------------------

Kaylia is a career-student who is currently doing her MA in Writing and
Literature. A student/office assistant by day and a blogger by night,
she dreams of one day having a job where she doesn’t need to wear shoes
to work. Read more of her fabulous work here. [More about the
Author](http://hercanberra.com.au/peoples/kaylia-payne/)

[TERMS AND CONDITIONS](http://hercanberra.com.au/terms-and-conditions/)
© 2015 HER CANBERRA site by [Coordinate](http://www.coordinate.com.au)
