Long Journey Home
=================

By [seasonsnc](https://seasonsmagazinenc.com/author/seasonsnc/)

[July 29, 2019](https://seasonsmagazinenc.com/2019/07/)

*How one woman’s passion for her Mexican heritage and traditions of*\
*ancient coppersmithing is taking the home design world by storm*

By Jim Dodson   •   Photographs by John Koob Gessner

On a warm Saturday afternoon not long ago, the family of Alejandra
Thompson and North Carolina furniture industry icon Fred Starr gathered
at a nondescript warehouse in Greensboro to show visitors their
company’s latest creation: a stunning Fireclay farmhouse kitchen sink
made by artisans in Turkey.

In one section of the warehouse, tractor trailers were being loaded with
sinks bound for more than 3,000 signature home stores, and finer kitchen
and bath retailers across the country. 

In another corner, a staff craftsman for Thompson Traders was putting
the finishing touches on a spectacular custom kitchen display that was
headed for a home show in Atlanta called Haven, an elite showcase of
innovative products from key “influencers” in the booming home-design
market. Within weeks, several thousand more branded Sinkology farmhouse
sinks will be shipped out to thousands of retail outlets that have grown
to admire — and desire — the history-steeped products of Thompson
Traders.

These are busy days for a quiet little company born in the Triad. It is
the brainchild of Alex Thompson, as she prefers to be known to many
friends and associates across the region.

“There’s no mystery these sinks have captured the imagination of
customers,” observes Fred Starr, who joined Thompson Traders in 2008 as
chairman/CEO and has overseen the company’s extraordinary growth arc
during the past decade. Starr knows a thing or two about commercial
success, having guided Thomasville Furniture Industries to the top of
the furniture world during his decades as the CEO of the famous
furniture company. “These sinks are really beautiful works of art that
speak to the soul, unlike anything the market has seen up till now.”

“We all play a role in the company’s success,” explains Clifford
Thompson, the pleasant 38-year-old president of Thompson Traders and
eldest son of Alex and Cliff Thompson. “But it’s really Mom who is the
heart and soul of this operation. Without her, none of this ever would
have happened.”

“Without question,” agrees Cliff senior, a former Volvo executive and
computer engineer who has served multiple roles, from chief financial
officer to home-show construction boss. “Alex is the key.”

“That’s the truth. She’s the one,” adds younger son, J.J., the firm’s
executive vice president of operations who travels the world making
deals and finding artisans who can meet the company’s rigid standards of
production quality.

With this, all eyes fall on Thompson Traders’ diminutive founder and
spiritual muse, an elegant woman draped in white who looks decades
younger than her 60-something years.

Alex Thompson blushes, and waves away the compliments. “No, please, this
is a family story!” she says. “I’m so honored that people seem to love
our sinks. We make them to celebrate family and tradition. It’s almost
like a miracle.”

It all started out just 15 years ago with Alex Thompson’s simple hunch
that the spirit of her Mexican ancestry and girlhood memories might
translate into a nice little family business. Growing up among skilled
artisans in the ancient mountains west of Mexico City helped her realize
that even seemingly mundane objects like sinks and tubs became magical
when they were hand-crafted from hammered copper and other natural
elements. That realization — and her business acumen — have made
Greensboro-based Thompson Traders into something of an industry darling
and a bespoke leader in kitchen and bath innovation.

Divinely inspired or not, the appeal of their soulful sinks and
ever-expanding line of products lies in meticulous Old World workmanship
and museum-like designs that draw inspiration from classical artistry
and one of the planet’s oldest trades — the art of coppersmithing.

Yet undergirding their success, as every Thompson family member takes
pains to point out, is the satisfaction that their quiet, homegrown
company keeps roughly 750 artisans and coppersmiths in nine different
countries at work and a Triad staff of 30 workers fully employed.

“That gives me great comfort to know, and a strong sense of
responsibility to their families,” Alex Thompson says, as the tour of
the warehouse winds down. “Since I was a little girl, you see, I always
dreamed of creating a business people would love. For me, this has been
like a magical journey of faith and family — a love story from the
beginning.”

She was the youngest of 14 children in an old Colonial town called
Patzcuaro, set in the ancient hills west of Mexico City where the Day of
the Dead was first celebrated and local artisans and native Tarascan
Indians made beautiful things for centuries

Alex’s father, Rafael, was a self-made man who rebuilt the family’s
fortune by making and selling soap at age 14 after his father lost
everything in the Depression. He eventually rebuilt the family fortune
and would go on to buy four ranches and sugar refinery, and become
Patzcuaro’s mayor. “My father was the hardest-working man I ever knew,”
Alex remembers. “Such a good man. I remember how he cared for the
workers bringing sugar cane to his refinery. It seemed like a paradise
to me.” She describes her parents as “loving but very tradition-minded,”
their house always full of people — aunts and uncles, siblings, cousins.
“Every Sunday there was always a big dinner and all kinds of people came
to be part of it.”

The year she was 11, a young American named Clifford Thompson showed up
for Sunday dinner. The quiet 13-year-old from Illinois was staying with
her uncle. His daddy was a celebrated organic chemist who frequently
visited the region. Young Cliff had been sent down to scour the villages
around the lake for antique bowls for his mother’s collection.

“I see this young lady coming up the stairs — she was dressed in a
pin-striped sailor suit with a white bow. I remember telling myself that
I was going to marry her some day. This will be my wife,” Cliff
remembers.

He spoke little or no Spanish; Alejandra spoke no English.

“I thought he was very interesting,” she remembers. “And maybe we could
be friends. Patzcuaro was a wonderful place to grow up but even then I
dreamed of seeing a much bigger world.”

At 16, during a return trip with his family, Cliff actually proposed to
the young girl who stole his heart.

“I thought he was joking,” she recalls with a laugh.

“I really wasn’t,” he says, smiling, half a century later.

They followed up with letters and even a few phone calls.

Soon Alex, 17, was off to college in Guadalajara, where she studied
psychology and resided in a house with other female students and a
proper housemother guarding their virtue.

One afternoon out of the blue, Cliff Thompson showed up bearing 100
roses. He asked for Alex’s hand a second time.

“I was dating other boys. But our housemother told me that Cliff was the
one for me,” she recalls. “I don’t know how she knew this. We were so
unlike and hardly understood each other’s language.” But, she says,
there was a connection, something spiritual: “Something I already loved
about him. He was so smart, as unconventional as I was, a dreamer too. I
could see he had a very good heart, a glimpse of his soul.”

Two years later, however, her pretty head was turned by another young
man from a very good Mexican family. “He had everything, good looks, a
wealthy background and plenty of charm — maybe too much,” she laughs.
“So we got engaged. My parents were very happy.”

A month before the wedding, though, Alex began to have doubts. Her
father drove her to meet with her fiancé’s family. “I left a dinner
party and told my sister that I could not get married,” Alex recalls.
“She was horrified. Such scandal!” There were already gifts piling up
and her photograph had appeared in the newspaper. “You cannot imagine my
parent’s reaction when I told them. Luckily, my sister’s husband — the
one who hosted Cliff when we first met — told me, ‘Alex, if you have any
doubt, you cannot get married.’”

It took months for the pains to recede.

During this time, Alex wrote letters to Cliff — by now a gifted student
at Southern Cal, heading for a career in computer technology — but never
heard back from him. She began to date other boys, almost giving up on
her American suitor.

“But then comes a letter that tells me he wants to see me and is coming
to Mexico during a holy week and needs to talk with me, am I available?”

“Romantic, huh?” Cliff injects with a chuckle.

He arrived in Patzcuaro, she canceled her plans. He drives her up into
the hills where there is a nice view of the town’s famous namesake lake.

“OK,” said Cliff. “I came to see if you want to marry me. If not, I plan
to take a job in Switzerland and will never come back. This is the last
time I will ask.”

They’d never even held hands.

“When my parents returned, I tell them I have a nice surprise — I am
going to marry Clifford Thompson. Papi, my father, is very calm. He
simply asked me if I knew what I was doing. I told him that I did, that
I truly loved Clifford. We were soul mates.  My mother was not so
happy.”

Two months later, in November 1974, they were married in a civil
ceremony at her parents’ house in Patzcuaro.

The next January, they held a much larger wedding at the town’s
basilica, filled with flowers and lit by 500 candles. Alex was late for
the service because her Papi was in the hospital and she’d stopped to
receive his blessing. He sang her a song about wanting to be remembered
by his grandchildren. “I was late and my eye were swollen from crying
but it was such a beautiful service. The music was ‘The Impossible
Dream.’ Everyone cried!”

That same week, she received her green card and the couple headed for
snowy Chicago, where Cliff had a good job as a computer programmer for
Northern Trust.

As their plane took off, Alex Thompson could not imagine the life she
was flying toward.

As it happened, Chicago was in the grip of its snowiest winters in
memory. “But guess what?” Alex teases. “I *loved it!* I’d never seen
real snow. I loved everything about Chicago, too — the people, the
crowded stores, most of all the wonderful museums! It was a *new*
paradise.”

While Cliff worked, Alex went sledding and visited museums. On weekends
the couple went hiking, attended theaters and regularly visited Cliff’s
family home on a lake in Oak Brook. “They were such wonderful, brilliant
people,” she remembers. “They were so welcoming and kind to me. I loved
being with them. I loved Chicago and could have stayed there forever.”

In 1984, however, Cliff Thompson was offered a job with Volvo Truck
Division headquartered in Greensboro. By then parents of three busy
toddlers — two boys and a daughter, with a second daughter soon to be
born in Greensboro — the couple purchased a pretty redwood house set
back in the forest trees off Anson Road in Sedgefield.

“Quite honestly, I was anxious about what life in the South would be
like,” Alex says. “Greensboro was a beautiful but small city and I
feared I might not be welcome or happy here” she says. But then
something wonderful happened. “One of the neighbors invited me to lunch
at the country club and I met all these women who were so kind and
helpful. They loved the things I loved — food, family, entertaining.
They became my community, my closest friends and even helped raise my
children!”

It wasn’t long in this new community of friends before she met a
talented English-born interior decorator named Teresa Palmer. About this
same time, within six weeks of each other, Alex’s mother and father both
passed away. “I was so sad. But walking with Teresa every morning helped
me get through this lonely time. I knew I needed something to do with my
life beyond the children, so I said, ‘Teresa, why don’t we do something
together, create a little business. So we did.”

Using Palmer’s exquisite English eye for colors and luxurious fabrics
and Alex’s Mexican natural gift for design, they partnered in a custom
decorating business, creating unique holiday wreaths, live fir trees,
papier mâché figures and banners. They announced a three-day holiday
neighborhood sale that sold out of goods in two, generating \$8,000
profit.

By the end of the decade, their “little business” called Designs by
Palmer and Thompson was employing 36 young matrons in High Point,
producing stunning hand-made decorations for everyone from the High
Point Furniture Market to Tiffany’s of New York. When a call came from
the Clinton White House, they also produced decorations for its Easter
Egg Roll and Christmas extravaganza; ditto Saks Fifth Avenue, dozens of
famous hotels, castles in Scotland and even several Middle Eastern
potentates.

In 2001, due to health issues in both their families, Alex and Teresa
decided to simply close down their business.

“It had been a wonderful 10 years but I felt like I’d lost a child,”
Alex says. “We were so good together. I wondered what I would do next. I
prayed on this every day.”

The answer came the next year, in 2002, when eldest son Cliff graduated
from Purdue University with a degree in business. “We were at the
ceremony when mom suggested that we do something together, start a
little business of our own,” he remembers. “I loved the idea because it
involved going back to Mexico, where my brothers and sisters and I often
went for long holiday visits.” 

The old towns and villages around Patzcuaro were home to a deep heritage
of local craftsmanship, famous for black pottery artists, leather
makers, antiquities and, especially, coppersmiths who practiced the
ancient art of their ancestors.

On their next trip to Mexico, mother and son split up to search out
possible items to import. “My idea was a buy-sell business of handmade
crafts and  cool things like I used to bring back when I was a kid and
sell door-to-door  in Sedgefield without my parents’ knowledge,”
explains young Cliff with a laugh. “My mom’s idea was even cooler.”

Her heritage was calling.

Alex brought home a trio of beautifully wrought hammered copper sinks.
With the elder Cliff serving as the fledgling company’s banker, Team
Thompson set off for the Atlanta International Gift and Home Furnishings
Market with high hopes of making a splash, followed by the High Point
furniture market.

They sold absolutely nothing.

Young Cliff, who by then had married a Mexican woman named Martha whom
he’d met in his mama’s hometown, decided to take a job working for Wells
Fargo in Atlanta, but was happy to help Alex and his sister Samantha
take their copper sinks back to Atlanta for the annual gift show.

The unique handmade sinks attracted interest but yielded no sales. Then
a colleague of Cliff’s from the bank suggested that they were probably
attending the wrong show — they needed to take their sinks to the annual
national builders show in Las Vegas.

As they set up their 10-foot by 10-foot board foam booth in Vegas,
displaying nine of their distinctive sinks, the elder Cliff calmly broke
the bad news: “This is it. The last show we do. We either make it as a
business or we quit.”

Like manna from heaven, Alex and Samantha were swarmed by potential
customers, purchasers from major companies like The Home Depot, Lowe’s,
Menards and scores of smaller home and bath retailers. They became, in
fact, the talk of the show. A big fellow from Home Depot handed Alex his
card and told her to call if she was interested in visiting the company
headquarters in Atlanta.

Back home, on a Sunday, she phoned Mr. Home Depot. He remembered her
from Las Vegas — invited her to come for a visit next Tuesday at 9
o’clock.

A few days later, Alex and Samantha were on their way to Home Depot’s
headquarters campus with half a dozen copper sinks and company cards
Cliff  hurriedly printed up himself. “We had no literature, no brochures
or product information — just a dozen copper sinks in the basement,” he
quips.

Alex and Samantha were shown to a large boardroom with one of their
sinks in tow.

“A dozen polite men came in and sat around the table. “I told them about
my family and the heritage of coppersmithing in my part of Mexico.” She
remembers them looking so serious but interested. “Eventually they asked
me why I thought Home Depot customers would like our unusual copper
sinks?”

The answer was obvious to Alex Thompson.

“Because they are so beautiful.”

They agreed, “We’d like to put your sinks in 58 of our signature stores
around the country. Would that be OK with you?”

“All I could think about was my family and artists back in Mexico,” Alex
remembers. “This was like an answered prayer, a dream come true.”

So was the entry of legendary furniture man Fred Starr, whose wife Sue 
suggested her husband offer his expertise to the Thompsons as their
company grew and experienced growing pains complicated by the Great
Recession of 2008. By that point, the Thompsons had invested every penny
they had into their company to try to keep up with growing demand and an
expanding workforce of artisans in places like Mexico, Turkey, China,
Taiwan, Vietnam, India, Poland and Dubai.

Son J.J., who was in charge of making deals and assuring quality in
these faraway factories, once had to convince their factory partners in
India to ship a load of finished sinks despite an outstanding bill of
half a million dollars.  “We didn’t have the money in the bank yet, but
they agreed to ship anyway,” J.J. remembers.  “That’s the definition of
faith, the kind of people we work with.” Which is why he entrusted a
former classmate, Chris DeVillens, to run the comapany’s Siakology
division.

“Fred joining us was a godsend,” adds the elder Cliff. “He brought a
world of knowledge about contacts, logistics and marketing that we
sorely needed. Also, at a time when we needed financing to keep up with
production, his name opened doors with the banks.”

“I had many sleepless nights,” allows the little woman who dreamed up a
company and threw her heart and soul into it — including the kitchen
sink. “But in my heart I knew it would all work out. If you truly
believe in something and you pray for guidance, good things happen.”

A friend from Winston-Salem, in fact, taught her a special simple prayer
called the Prayer of Jabez, from the Book of Chronicles, which Alex
believes “produces many miracles in lives, including our family.”\

*Oh, Lord, that you would bless me, indeed*

*And expand my territory,*

*And that your hand would guide me*

*And keep me from evil*

Every day since, several times a day, Alex Thompson prays the Prayer of
Jabez. “I think it means you put everything you have into the hands of
God, asking Him to help you make a difference in people’s lives. The
success of our company, I truly believe, is proof of the prayer’s
life-affirming power.”

Her children and grandchildren, she notes, also say the prayer.

Twenty years ago this winter, another life-affirming connection was made
when Alex was invited by Ann Hummel, co-founder of the Piedmont Chapter
of Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation (JDRF), to apply her decorating
genius to the organization’s annual fundraising gala, then in its second
year. At that time, Alex was helping decorate the Greensboro Ballet’s
annual production of *The Nutcracker*, in which her youngest daughter,
aka “Little Alex,” danced.

At 15, Little Alex was diagnosed with T1D, a disease that scarcely
slowed her down but prompted a new chapter in the amazing journey of
both daughter and her visionary mother.

Little Alex would go on to become a Morehead Scholar finalist but choose
to attend Emory University. Today, at 33, she’s a mother and top
executive for Chanel based in New York, as passionate and beautiful as
her mom.

To nobody’s surprise, Alex and Cliff took on the job of designing and
engineering the JDRF’s annual gala, alternately staged in Winston-Salem
and Greensboro every January, an artistic feat that has dazzled gala
guests and helped raise record amounts of money for juvenile diabetes
research and treatment for 18 straight years.

One evening last summer, as Cliff and Alex entertained dinner guests at
their  beautiful art-filled home on Anson Road, Alex revealed that the
couple was already into the deep planning stages for the 20th
anniversary gala, to be held January in the ballroom at the Sheraton
Greensboro at Four Seasons. “We always want it to be a magical, big
surprise — the most ambitious and beautiful thing we’ve ever done,” she
said at the time.

Besides, her mind that evening was in her romantic past. After serving
her home-cooked gourmet Mexican meal (and some very fine tequila brought
back from Patzcuaro), Alex showed her guests through a house filled with
stunning artifacts from their world travels to meet the artisans who
make their Old World sinks: A 6-foot carved crucifix from Mexico, a pair
of ancient carved teak doors from India, hand-carved statues and a
remarkable table containing scores of tiny objects, and gifts from
strangers along foreign paths and roads.

As the evening ended, Alex reflected on the importance of the objects.
“These little things are my favorite, sacred proof that I finally got to
see a much wider world,” she mused, standing by her ancient front door,
forever open.  h
