<span>Should You Be Eating Eggs?</span> {#link-70dbecb4 .css-fnr6md .e1h9rw200 itemprop="headline"}
=======================================

Do eggs raise your cholesterol? The advice keeps changing.


[![Jane E.
Brody](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2018/06/12/multimedia/jane-e-brody/jane-e-brody-thumbLarge.png "Jane E. Brody"){.css-1rjmmt7
.ey68jwv2}](https://www.nytimes.com/by/jane-e-brody){.css-uwwqev}

-   April 22, 2019

Once more, Humpty Dumpty took a great fall last month when a new study
linked egg consumption to cardiovascular disease. What follows may — or
may not — put Humpty back together again, especially for egg lovers who
cheered the latest dietary guidelines that seemed to exonerate this
popular cholesterol-rich food.

While suggesting that Americans “eat as little dietary cholesterol as
possible,” the guidelines’ scientific report in 2015 stated “cholesterol
is not a nutrient of concern for overconsumption.”

Then [a report in
JAMA](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2728487){.css-1g7m0tk}
of a very thorough long-term analysis involving nearly 30,000 men and
women initially free of cardiovascular disease suggested otherwise. The
researchers, headed by Victor W. Zhong of Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, found that eating as little as one-half an
egg a day could increase a person’s risk of heart disease, stroke and
premature death.

“My study showed a dose-response relationship,” Dr. Zhong, a nutrition
epidemiologist, told me. “The higher the consumption of eggs, the
greater the risk. Those who consumed less than one egg a week had no
increased risk.”

Among study participants, every 300 milligrams of cholesterol added to
the daily diet increased the risk of cardiovascular disease by 17
percent and premature death from any cause by 18 percent during an
average follow-up of 17.5 years, the study found.

Given that the yolk of one large egg contains up to 200 milligrams of
cholesterol, and dietary cholesterol can raise blood levels of
artery-damaging LDL-cholesterol in some people, it is not the first time
eggs have been pilloried as a hazard to the heart. For decades we’ve
been advised to limit eggs and keep daily cholesterol intake at or below
300 milligrams.

But before you give up eggs entirely or switch to egg whites, it’s worth
considering the study’s limitations and how the findings fit into
current American eating patterns and previous studies of the
relationship of eggs and cholesterol to health.

The study was based on an analysis of 29,615 community-dwelling adults
without known heart disease who reported at the start what they ate
along with a slew of health-related lifestyle habits like smoking and
alcohol consumption and health variables like weight, blood pressure and
blood lipids. In the nearly two decades that followed, 5,400 people had
a cardiovascular event (usually a heart attack or stroke) and 6,132 died
from any cause.

Seeking to clarify how consuming cholesterol influenced the risk of
cardiovascular disease and death, Dr. Zhong and co-authors zeroed in on
egg consumption, the cleanest dietary measure of how much cholesterol
participants ate. The team concluded that as little as half an egg a
day, or about three large eggs a week, increased a person’s chances of
developing cardiovascular disease by 6 percent and of dying from any
cause by 8 percent during the study period.

This was not an intervention study, so it is not possible to say what
might have happened if people refrained from eating eggs and substituted
other foods.

“The replacement food is critical,” Dr. Frank B. Hu, chairman of
nutrition and epidemiology at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health, told me. If, for example, you replace eggs with low-fat yogurt
with fruit and nuts or whole grains, it would likely improve your
health.

But if people eat two or three fried eggs along with bacon or sausage
and buttered white toast, you wouldn’t expect a healthy outcome, Dr. Hu
said.

“Intervention studies have shown that moderate egg consumption doesn’t
appreciably raise cholesterol levels,” Dr. Hu said. “Low to moderate
consumption of three or four eggs a week doesn’t appear to have a major
effect on blood cholesterol unless the person has high cholesterol or
Type 2 diabetes.”

He added, “In most previous studies of healthy people, moderate egg
consumption was not associated with a significant increase in
cardiovascular risk.” However, among 21,275 [participants in the
Physicians’ Health
Study](https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.734210){.css-1g7m0tk}
who were followed for more than 20 years, those who ate one or more eggs
a day were more likely to develop heart failure than those who ate eggs
infrequently.

“Contradictory findings among different studies are not unusual — it’s
part of the scientific process,” Dr. Hu said. “In forming guidelines,
you have to look at the totality of evidence rather than overreact to a
single new study.”

Zachary S. Clayton, author of a comprehensive [review of research on egg
consumption and heart
health](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28359368){.css-1g7m0tk}
published in Nutrition in 2017, said in an interview that giving two
eggs a day for 12 weeks to healthy people didn’t raise any of their
cardiovascular risk factors and “actually decreased their triglyceride
levels.”

But, Dr. Clayton, a postdoctoral fellow in nutrition at the University
of Colorado, Boulder, said, “It’s important to distinguish between
hypo-responders and hyper-responders to dietary cholesterol. If someone
is a hyper-responder, eating two eggs a day would increase the risk of
cardiovascular disease.”

This prompted him to suggest that before people start eating eggs, they
should “get their blood work done; then after eating eggs for three or
four weeks, get their blood work done again” to assess their personal
response to dietary cholesterol. “If everything remains in a normal
range, for them eggs are not a risk factor,” he said.

Meanwhile, consumers might take two other important issues into account.
One is what other foods dominate their diet. Saturated fat, found in red
meats and full-fat dairy foods, has a far more potent effect on blood
levels of cholesterol and cardiovascular risk than does dietary
cholesterol per se. Thus, if you follow a Mediterranean-style eating
pattern, replete with fruits and vegetables, fish and some poultry but
eat meat, processed meats, cheese and other full-fat dairy foods only
rarely, you would minimize concerns about the cholesterol in eggs.

Also worth considering are the nutrition and health benefits afforded by
eggs. Eggs are a readily available, inexpensive, easy-to-prepare and
easy-to-digest food, making them important contributions to the diets of
many elderly people as well as young children and adults on the run.
When I’m traveling, boiled or scrambled eggs are often the most
healthful, satisfying choices available. Despite their high cholesterol
content, eggs have relatively little saturated fat.

Furthermore, eggs are an excellent source of important nutrients. For 72
calories in a single large egg, you get more than six grams of protein,
nearly five grams of mostly unsaturated fat, almost no carbohydrates and
only 71 milligrams of sodium. Eggs are good sources of phosphorus,
potassium, vitamins A and D, and various B vitamins, and are especially
high in lutein and zeaxanthin, which help protect against age-related
macular degeneration. Egg yolks are also the most concentrated dietary
source of choline, an essential nutrient critical to brain development
and a healthy nervous system.


**Correction:** April 23, 2019
An earlier version of this article misstated the amount of sodium in a
large egg. It is 71 milligrams, not 71 grams.


Jane Brody is the Personal Health columnist, a position she has held
since 1976. She has written more than a dozen books including the best
sellers “Jane Brody’s Nutrition Book” and “Jane Brody’s Good Food Book.”
<span class="css-4w91ra"> </span>



A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D5 of the New
York edition with the headline: Cracking the Code on Eggs and Your
Diet<span>. [Order Reprints](http://www.nytreprints.com/) | [Today’s
Paper](http://www.nytimes.com/pages/todayspaper/index.html) |
[Subscribe](https://www.nytimes.com/subscriptions/Multiproduct/lp8HYKU.html?campaignId=48JQY)</span>



