##### Can grayscale pc or cell phone avoid blue light wave? is black/white screen another light frecuency?

> tech ethicist Tristan Harris  
> We're simple animals, excited by bright colors, it turns out.  
> field of applied neuroscience  
> Mack McKelvey, the chief executive of the marketing firm SalientMG in Washington, D.C.  
> Thomas Z. Ramsoy, the chief executive of Neurons, a four-year-old company based in Copenhagen.  
> "Color and shape, these are the icebreakers when it comes to grabbing
people's attention, and attention is the new currency," he said. "Having
an interface that grabs people's attention without disturbing them in
the wrong way, without consciously intruding in their space, that's the
fine line." What going grayscale does, Mr. Ramsoy said, is reintroduce choice.
"You have to take away the sound as well."  
> One way Silicon Valley could help ease phone addiction is by using a
more thoughtful color palette, said Bevil Conway, an investigator at the
National Eye Institute, who researches color and emotion.
The same way people think about a color scheme when they're planning the
living room décor, Mr. Conway said, they should think about color when
it comes to their phone's home screen too.
"If you had a color palette, you would end up with a phone that looked
pleasant and was not addictively rewarding, that had some
intentionality, but of course nobody wants you to do that," he said.
"Because what they want is for you to look."



## DISRUPTIONS | Is the Answer to Phone Addiction a Worse Phone?

By [Nellie Bowles](https://www.nytimes.com/by/nellie-bowles)

-   [Jan. 12, 2018 | New York Times](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/12/technology/grayscale-phone.html)

[SAN FRANCISCO --- I've gone gray, and it's great.](https://www.nytimes.com/es/2018/01/17/hay-soluciones-para-acabar-con-tu-adiccion-al-telefono)

In an effort to break my smartphone addiction, I've joined a small group
of people turning their phone screens to grayscale --- cutting out the
colors and going with a range of shades from white to black. First
popularized by the tech ethicist Tristan Harris, the goal of sticking to
shades of gray is to make the glittering screen a little less
stimulating.

I've been gray for a couple days, and it's remarkable how well it has
eased my twitchy phone checking, suggesting that one way to break phone
attachment may be to, essentially, make my phone a little worse. We're
simple animals, excited by bright colors, it turns out.

Silicon Valley companies like Facebook and Google know this, and they
have increasingly been turning to the field of applied neuroscience to
see how exactly brains respond to color in the apps, what brings
pleasure and what keeps the eye. New research shows how important color
is to our understanding of priorities and emotion.

But not everyone wants to be so enamored with their screen. This week,
two major investors asked Apple to figure out how to help parents limit
their children's use of iPhones and iPads, [citing concerns over
"long-term health."](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/08/technology/apple-tech-children-jana-calstrs.html?module=inline)
There's also a growing movement among some early tech employees warning
against the products they've built. And many consumers are starting to
wonder what this is all doing to our minds.

Mack McKelvey, the chief executive of the marketing firm SalientMG in
Washington, D.C., said she's aware of the tricks phones use to keep you
on them longer --- and coming back sooner.

"You don't buy black-and-white cereal boxes, you buy the really
stimulating colored one, and these apps have developed really cool
tiles, cool shapes, cool colors, all designed to stimulate you," Ms.
McKelvey said. "But there's a vibrant world out there, and my phone
shouldn't be it."

She decided to make the switch to gray as well. But it was trickier than she expected.

"It took like 40 minutes to figure it out. They buried the setting," she
said. "You have to really want to do it." (If you want to try, [here are
some
tips.](https://lifehacker.com/change-your-screen-to-grayscale-to-combat-phone-addicti-1795821843))

One person Facebook and others turn to is Thomas Z. Ramsoy, the chief
executive of Neurons, a four-year-old company based in Copenhagen. His
business uses brain scans and eye tracking technology to study apps,
updates and future technology. The company often measures the electrical
activity of the brain while a consumer is interacting with a phone, such
as texting and scrolling Facebook.

The goal, Mr. Ramsoy said, is usually for a product to inspire happy
emotions and draw attention without freaking a consumer out. For the
past year, he said, Facebook has been its largest client, [publicizing
some of the
research](https://www.facebook.com/iq/articles/how-virtual-reality-facilitates-social-connection).
"There is so much business now, we pinch ourselves," he said.

"Color and shape, these are the icebreakers when it comes to grabbing
people's attention, and attention is the new currency," he said. "Having
an interface that grabs people's attention without disturbing them in
the wrong way, without consciously intruding in their space, that's the
fine line."

What going grayscale does, Mr. Ramsoy said, is reintroduce choice.

Companies use colors to encourage subconscious decisions, Mr. Ramsoy
said. (So that, for example, I may want to open email, but I'll end up
on Instagram, having seen its colorful button.) Making the phone gray
eliminates that manipulation. Mr. Ramsoy said it reintroduces
"controlled attention."

"It's a very good idea," he said. "You have to take away the sound as
well."

One way Silicon Valley could help ease phone addiction is by using a
more thoughtful color palette, said Bevil Conway, an investigator at the
National Eye Institute, who researches color and emotion.

"Color's not a signal for detecting objects, it's actually something
much more fundamental: It's for telling us what's likely to be
important," Mr. Conway said. "If you have lots of color and contrast
then you're under a constant state of attentional recruitment. Your
attentional system is constantly going, 'Look look look over here.' "

The same way people think about a color scheme when they're planning the
living room décor, Mr. Conway said, they should think about color when
it comes to their phone's home screen too.

"If you had a color palette, you would end up with a phone that looked
pleasant and was not addictively rewarding, that had some
intentionality, but of course nobody wants you to do that," he said.
"Because what they want is for you to look."

Silicon Valley is in a battle for our attention, and often I feel like
the last person in charge of my own eyes. After going to grayscale, I'm
not a different person all of a sudden, but I feel more in control of my
phone, which now looks like a tool rather than a toy. If I unlock it to
write an email, I'm a little less likely to forget the goal and tap on
Instagram. If I'm waiting in line for coffee, this gray slab is not as
delightful a distraction as it once was.

The switch made me realize, in a tangible way, that I still have a little choice here.

Site Information Navigation
---------------------------

-   [© 2019 ](https://help.nytimes.com/hc/en-us/articles/115014792127-Copyright-notice)

<!-- -->

-   -   The New York Times Company

<!-- -->

-   [Contact
    Us](https://help.nytimes.com/hc/en-us/articles/115015385887-Contact-Us)

-   [Work with
    us](https://www.nytimes.com/subscription?campaignId=37WXW)
