# *they are what they believe they are*

> We have brain scans now. DID patients have changed their body chemistry with their thoughts. 

******

+ Dr: *One identity in an individual with Dissociative Identity Disorder can have high cholesterol. One. There have been cases where one identity is allergic to bee stings. The others are not.*
+ Are there moments where two identities
can coexist at the same time?

+ Dr: *There are times when two identities can take the "light" or "the spot" or consciousness at the same time. This happened with a student that I was working with. And her left and right hand were taking notes in different hand-writings about separate things at the same time. The differences in the identities can be dramatic. As much as the difference between you and me and every person in that auditorium. The identities have different IQ's. They have different physical strengths. One personality is a Russian weightlifter and can lift three times his body weight. Their ability to hyper-focus and have different experiences is astounding. Have these individuals, through their suffering, unlocked the potential of the brain? Is this the ultimate doorway to all things we call unknown? Is this where our sense of the supernatural comes from?*

******

+ Kevin (etal): *I wanna talk about Kevin and what his mother did to him. I remember it all.*
+ I'm happy you're suddenly so open.

+ *Kevin's mother had rather malevolent ways of punishing a three-year-old.*
+ Is that when you arrived in the light?

+ *Yeah. The one way to avoid her attention was to keep everything spotless, everything perfect.*
+ I know you're coming from good intentions, Dennis, but there are other ways to help Kevin now. I've lost so many patients into the system. I want you to know, Dennis, I will never stop fighting for you. My patients have become my family. They are what I've chosen instead of a more traditional path. I hope you feel you can be truly honest with me.

+ *I actually wanna be honest with you. I lied before. When you asked if I'd ever met The Beast, I said no. That really isn't true. You wrote about a woman in Germany who'd been blind for 10 years. And then, it was discovered that she had DID. Then three of her identities developed sight. And you speculated that her optical nerves regenerated because of her beliefs. What are you trying to say? There are things, Dr. Fletcher, that all of us would find hard to believe.*

+ Are you trying to tell me there's a 24th identity?
+ *You protect the broken. When you said that you thought this situation was extraordinary, I knew you can maybe understand.*

+ Understand what? 
+ *The Beast is real.*
