[Race Ipsa Loquitur](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/) 
============================================================

![](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/vW7Zeg5oQZa8QsqXqee7GA-e1522670030415-1038x576.jpg)

The 2018 Barkley Marathons: Confidence through Failure 
======================================================

[April 2, 2018](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/)]

My training log entry the day before the 2018 Barkley Marathons read:
“Once that cigarette is lit, I’m going to race my little brains out.
Give it all my all, and give it hell.”

I’ve never been one to write race reports, but then again, I’ve never
raced something like the Barkley Marathons. I’ve spent the past week
trying to wrap my head around my experience, and hoping to find the
words to convey its enormity. Just like so many things in life, I
realize that I’m never going to be able to do it justice through my
words, so this is the best you’re going to get.

So sit back, grab your MoonPie and RC Cola, and prepare for a novel
(brevity has never been my strong suit, especially here). It’s broken up
into chunks, so feel free to navigate to what interests you – there’s an
account of my prep, of the race itself, along with my reflections, and
then the very end contains gear/lessons and bullet points for those of
you (wise ones!) who just want the bullet points nitty gritty.

**THE PREP**

From the very moment I received my condolences and my heart rate
returned to normal, the race loomed over everything I did for the next
few months, an unspoken adventure to be had. I pivoted my training
immediately after Sean O’Brien 100k, but that still gave me less than
two months to take a crash course in everything Barkley, from map &
compass courses to land nav skills to a focus on vert. An under the
radar trip to Frozen Head in February made clear to me how different
this terrain is than what I’m used to in California (NB: you can run on
the trails, and ONLY the trails, so it’s of limited use, but I felt it
was necessary to at least get a feel for the park, the layout, and some
major landmarks)

[![](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/zT6VgEKHROmlZXERI54dw-e1522610105666-225x300.jpg){.wp-image-727
.size-medium width="225" height="300"
sizes="(max-width: 225px) 100vw, 225px"
srcset="http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/zT6VgEKHROmlZXERI54dw-e1522610105666-225x300.jpg 225w, http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/zT6VgEKHROmlZXERI54dw-e1522610105666-768x1022.jpg 768w, http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/zT6VgEKHROmlZXERI54dw-e1522610105666-769x1024.jpg 769w"}](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/zT6VgEKHROmlZXERI54dw-e1522610105666.jpg)
lemme tell you – that first time you see the gate, ALL the nerves come
out
But I was thriving in a new challenge, in focusing on getting as much
vert as possible, and of the fun little secretive nature of it all.
(staying mum about it, especially as a virgin, is an unwritten
tradition). As I told my coach, this race was solely for me. Not for
others, not for sponsors, just for me and my desire to rediscover my
original path into racing. It was sheer stupid for the sake of stupid,
and I loved that.** **

But as the race date drew near, the fun and novelty of training began to
be replaced by very real self-doubt and panic that I wasn’t prepared,
nor that I had any business of even attempting the Barkley. I kept
finding every reason I had why this was a poor idea: I had only been
back running for a year. I had just run my first 100k in over two years
just a month ago, and it wasn’t exactly a smashing success. I didn’t
have the time on feet necessary to do well given my recent return from
injury. But for every chirp of self-doubt, I reminded myself that the
last time I felt this outside of my comfort zone was before the first
World’s Toughest Mudder in 2011 (and that ended up being a pretty decent
[life-changing
event](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/uncategorized/how-worlds-toughest-mudder-ruined-my-life/)).
As nerves swelled, I repeated to myself the mantra that “this is where
the magic happens.” Yet I continued to vacillate between absolute
self-doubt and fear, and extreme excitement. Connecting with fellow
Barkers before the race helped immensely with the nerves (especially my
partner in crime, the amazingly awesome [Maggie
Guterl](http://www.maggatron.com)), but as I rolled into Frozen Head the
few days before the race, I was losing a battle with the rising tide of
nerves and self-doubt.

**THE RACE**

I arrived in Tennessee just as it began snowing, with the sole thought
of “well, at least the snow will break my fall.” A hike up to Chimney
Top on Wednesday confirmed the depth of it, as did all the other
pictures that other Barkers began posted. On Thursday, more folks
started rolling into camp. Barkley is an odd duck – I’ve never been
asked “are you a virgin?” so many times before in my life. To ease my
nerves, I joked that I hadn’t been asked that since I was 16.  I finally
had the opportunity to meet fellow attorney [Stephanie
Case](https://ultrarunnergirl.com), and we bonded over the fact that we
shared the same goal to “make it back to camp alive.”

Not sure if she was kidding, but I wasn’t.

Nerves were at an all-time high, but a strange thing happened on Friday
when we checked in and got the directions and the map. I suddenly became
focused and clear. I was in it, this was happening, and I was ready.
While I barely slept in the back of my rental minivan the night before,
I felt an odd peace rising the next morning. And when the conch blew at
8:33am, it was game time.

[![](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1153-225x300.jpg){.wp-image-726
.size-medium width="225" height="300"
sizes="(max-width: 225px) 100vw, 225px"
srcset="http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1153-225x300.jpg 225w, http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1153-768x1024.jpg 768w"}](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1153.jpg)
“Maybe if I just smile the nerves will go away”
**Loop 1**

The lighting of the cigarette, and we were off. Many veterans warned me
that the start of the race is frantic and stressful, as everyone
converges on the first Book, attempting to hang with the veterans for as
long as possible. Ascending to the first Book, I felt confident about my
pace, hanging out in the front. But after grabbing the first page and
starting the first descent, a sobering dose of reality set in: I may be
able to climb with the big boys, but technical off-trail descending is
not my forte.

Within minutes, the lead pack was out of sight.

Stifling the rising sense of panic, I focused on finding my way to the
next book, determined to not get caught in a no man’s land by myself. As
we climbed out of Book 2, I realized that I was gaining on folks, and
able to make up lost ground from my slow descending – such would be the
story of the next 30 hours for me. Shortly after Book 2, I ended up
catching up with fellow virgin John Burton and veteran Jodi Isenor, and
the three of us worked our way through the course for the next several
hours. I’m forever indebted and grateful to Jodi for being such an
incredible teacher out there. As long as you can keep up, it’s quite
easy (but entirely unhelpful to you in future loops or years) to blindly
follow a veteran and shut off your brain. But Jodi made a point to make
sure John and I were checking our bearings, and noticing certain
landmarks along the way, especially for when to take certain turns on
the reverse loop. I made as many mental notes as possible (whether or
not I retained most of them remains to be seen). Jodi is a phenomenal
navigator, and we hit perfect lines through Stallion and lots of the
traditionally confusing part of the course (let’s be honest, as a
virgin, it’s ALL confusing). As we approached Testicle Spectacle and Rat
Jaw, I remember breathing a sigh of relief, thinking “phew – this is the
part that everyone says is easy.”

Famous last words.

Perhaps it’s easy in that the grade isn’t as steep, and navigation isn’t
an issue, but I don’t think any of us were expecting the mud and slick
conditions. Climbing Testicle ended up more of a crawl at points, with
traction impossible to come by. Many internet commentators told me that
obstacle racing would do no good for me at Barkley. I’d agree, but it
did teach me that if you can’t get traction, hands and knees is the way
to go. So as poles proved useless, I resorted to a (literal) crawl.
 “Perhaps,” I thought, “Rat Jaw will be better. The saw briars will
provide traction.”

You know condition are bad when you prefer to go through the saw briars
than the well-worn mud trail.

I’ve been told that looking up at Rat Jaw is a super intimidating.
Fortunately, the fog made it so I could only see about 20 feet in front
of my face, so the intimidation was going to have to wait for another
day. The one redeeming quality of Rat Jaw is it’s the one out and back
place where you can pass by runners on the same loop. As we climbed and
crawled our way up, figures started to emerge from the fog. Gary,
Guillaume, Ally, Jamil – all flying down the mountain. Given the
turnaround, by my estimates they were about 45 minutes ahead of us at
that point, which, not going to lie, pretty much made me pee my pants
with excitement. I knew that meant we were moving solidly, and on track
for a 9ish hour loop. Visions of 5 loops danced in my head. And it was
here I realized that I had been having a blast the entire time – true
Type I fun, and I couldn’t wait to get that first loop in the books.

[![](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1158-300x225.jpg){.wp-image-729
.size-medium width="300" height="225"
sizes="(max-width: 300px) 100vw, 300px"
srcset="http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1158-300x225.jpg 300w, http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1158-768x576.jpg 768w, http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1158-1024x768.jpg 1024w"}](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1158.jpg)
Fancy Barkley aid station at Frozen Head tower.
After seeing friendly cheering faces at the tower, we proceeded to head
back down Rat Jaw, and I proceeded to turn it into Amelia’s Buttslide.
But it didn’t matter, because I was all smiles and feeling great.

But, as I learned, at Barkley – everything can change in an instant.

And that instant happened when John took a bad spill down Rat Jaw and I
then took a spill under the prison, and we lost Jodi. Suddenly, it was
two virgins alone in the woods, with some tricky book placements coming
up. But I had my map, I had my cheat sheet with all my bearings I drew
up the night before, and I had my compass, and we made our way.

Suddenly, the course became frustrating, as we wasted an hour searching
for the next Book. Tick…tock. We were in the right spot, but the heavy
rains and fog began to roll in. I was soaked through from head to toe
from the prison spill, and in that instant, I realized how one error can
cost you an entire race.

We managed to find that Book, and the next two, albeit much more slower,
and with more navigational mistakes. But the funny thing is that admidst
that frustration of losing Jodi, a new feeling began to emerge – a
feeling of competence. I was shooting bearings, and they were accurate.
I was getting to the right spots, just fumbling around rocks and trees
and the like for the actual books. And while we lost an hour and half
searching, as we ran down Chimney Top after grabbing that last page of
the last Book, I felt more empowered and competent and capable that I
ever have in my entire life.

John and I rolled up to the gate, finishing Loop 1 in 10:57, all smiles.
“Fun course you got out there, Laz,” I told him, and he told me I was
the first woman in, and still on 100 mile pace. Of course, Jodi had
finished the first loop in 9:20, so the error of that one spill, one
mistake, proved to be a big one in terms of time.

The following two videos are post-Loop 1,  handing Laz our pages
(courtesy of [Irun4ultra](https://irun4ultra.org))


<http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/midlap-1-barkley.mp4>



<http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/post-loop-1-2-1.mp4>


“You’re probably not going to break 50, but you can still bust the
course record”

**Loop 2**

After rolling up to the gates, we realized that all veterans were back
out on Loop 2, so there was really no option other than two virgins
going out into the woods alone, at night. “It’s ok,” I thought, “we can
handle this.”

Then, the skies opened.

After 20 minutes in camp, switching into dry clothes, taping toes with
Rocktape, and getting some words of encouragement from the amazing Linda
Robbins, John and I headed out in the pouring rain, dark and blinding
fog, knowing that the task at hand was formidable, but thankful for the
great guidance of Jodi the first lap who also made sure that we were
taking notes ourselves. God knows we needed them now. Unfortunately, it
wouldn’t be very long until we came to a standstill – in the storm, the
exact location of the first Book eluded us (which is rather embarrassing
to admit considering we were just there a few hours before). We
searched. And searched. And turned around in circles.

Tick. Tock.

5 loops slipped away.

“ok, Fun Run it is” I murmured to myself.

Tick. Tock.

At this point, our best bet was to hope that someone else came up the
trail to help us look. I knew that Maggie Guterl would be coming out
again, and after about an hour, she showed up with Eoin Keith: honestly,
I’ve never been so excited to see someone. Eoin helped us find the first
Book, and we set off, a team of 4 virgins, focusing on our compass
bearings, as eyesight and landmarks were useless at this point.

Two books later, we see a headlamp in the distance as we climbed towards
a peak. Jamil had been at the third Book, searching for several hours.
The five of us combed the location, and, getting frustrated, I turned to
find a bit of shelter to pee. And in front of me, there was the book,
shoved in the crevice. (note to self: one win for navigational peeing).

We continued on through the dark and the rain, descending down towards
the prison, which had now turned into Class 3 rapids (for excellent
footage of this, check out [Jamil’s
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dRpEE-82bWc)).

And, around sunrise and halfway through the loop, reality began to set
in that we going to miss the cut off. This, actually, was news to me. I
was under the impression that there was no cut off for the second lap,
just a 40 hour cut off for a Fun Run. In my mind, even if we did an 18
hour lap and came in at 30 hours, we wouldn’t be “timed out.” (my lawyer
brain was building up arguments to Laz that a 10hour third lap was
TOTALLY doable…totally). But Jamil broke the news that it’s 13:20 per
loop, so we were going to miss the 26:40 cut off.

The funny thing is that not a single one of us questioned whether we
should go on and complete the lap. We were about as far away as you
could get from camp, daylight was breaking, this would be an amazing way
to see and learn the rest of the course in a counterclockwise direction,
and dammit – none of us were going to be quitters.

So we trudged onward, knowing our fate, but making the best of it. And
honestly, I couldn’t have asked for a better, or more fun, second loop.
At this point, I must mention how grateful I am to Jamil, who graciously
played “tour guide” to us virgins. I have no doubt in my mind that he
could have taken off once we helped him locate that third Book – he’s
much stronger than us, and we encouraged him to do so. But he hung with
us, teaching along the way.

30 hours in, I nailed the last book location (thanks for making me nav,
Jamil!) and the 5 of us trotted down Bird, touching the gate together. I
did try a brief moment of convincing Laz to let me go for a Fun Run…that
got shot down quickly.

That second loop wouldn’t count in the Barkley record books, but it
counted in mine.

It didn’t feel like a DNF – it felt like a victory. A hard-fought
victory, defeating the self-doubt demons I wrestled with leading up to
the race. And there was no sadness when taps played (sorry I was a bit
too giddy…), because in place of sadness, it was a newfound feeling of
self-confidence. The fire was lit, and it was time to fan those flames.

[![](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1163-300x225.jpg){.wp-image-732
.size-medium width="300" height="225"
sizes="(max-width: 300px) 100vw, 300px"
srcset="http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1163-300x225.jpg 300w, http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1163-768x576.jpg 768w, http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1163-1024x768.jpg 1024w"}](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/IMG_1163.jpg)
The Fab 5 rolling in together
**POST-RACE**

For those of you who know me, my favorite thing in the entire world is a
post-race shower. More accurately, sitting down in a post-race shower.
And a campground shower definitely wasn’t going to stop me from doing
that. So I took my [Sufferfest](http://www.sufferfestbeer.com) beer I
smuggled all the way from California, and sat my butt down in that
campground shower next to a cockroach, and started to let things sink
in. Such as the fact that there were so few folks left out on the
course, and we were only 30 hours in (Gary and Guillaume on Loop 3, and
Steph and Gab doing Loop 2). The chatter that this was perhaps the worst
conditions and weather Barkley has ever seen (I don’t think I
appreciated that at the time).  How many strong veterans even failed to
finish Loop 2. And honestly, how much fun I had out there. I came into
this race, fully expecting Type II fun from start to finish, but it was
genuinely, legitimately, Type I. How many Barkers can say that?

And as we gathered around the campfire as night fell, and I proceeded to
shove every piece of food into my mouth I possibly could (a trend that
continued for the next week…whoops, still is!), I told myself I would
give myself a few days before I answered the question “will you come
back?”

But I already knew the answer.

**REFLECTIONS**

The journey through self-doubt is one worth taking

It’s been a long time since I’ve truly pushed myself outside of my
comfort zone. I’ve been very fortunate in that I haven’t “failed” at a
lot in life. As we approached Barkley, I realized that the last time I
confronted the overwhelming possibility of failure was at [World’s
Toughest Mudder
2011](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/uncategorized/the-ten-commandments-of-worlds-toughest-mudder-part-i/).
But I didn’t fail at that. And for the last 7 years, while it may look
like I was taking on gnarly races through World’s Toughest Mudder and
Death Races and Spartan, they were all familiar, and well within my
comfort zone.

Barkley was far, FAR from my comfort zone. But as [I’ve
preached](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_J49oG5MnN4), the more
something scares you, the more you should run towards it. I spent the
months leading up to Barkley swimming in a feeling that I was in over my
head, which simultaneously scared me and invigorated me. For the first
time, I had to swallow the very real fact that 99% of people fail at
this race (mostly, just no one wants to be “that person lost out in the
woods”). And while I generally don’t believe in results-oriented goals
for much of anything in life, Barkley is definitely a race where they
don’t work (at least not the first attempt).

The more I reflected, the more I realized the entire Barkley process was
a journey to rediscovering myself. To heading back to my roots, of where
I started in racing, and doing really hard and semi-stupid stuff simply
for the love of it. No prize purses, no TV cameras, and the only reward
for finishing is that you don’t have to go out for another loop (hence
the advent of the \#bringingstupidback hashtag)

As odd as it sounds, once I lined up at that yellow gate, waiting for
the cigarette to be lit, I knew the hardest part was over – I had
overcome the self-doubt that would make it so easy to just never try in
the first place. By giving myself the permission to try, I could not
fail.

[Confidence can spring from
failure ]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}

The weeks before Barkley, I doubted what I was getting myself into: I
had just started to rebuild confidence as an athlete after a [year on
the sidelines from
injury](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/rehab/2016-a-year-of-healing/),
and a topsy-turvy frustrating [year of
rebuilding](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/spartan/2017-year-rediscovering-joy/),
and I was just starting to feel strong and run well again. I doubted
that tackling a race that has a 99% failure rate was a wise move, or
that I was ready for it. And I started to fear that an attempt at
Barkley would destroy whatever confidence I had started to build.

But as illogical as it sounds, the reverse happened: **my failure at
Barkley left me feeling more confident in myself than I’ve ever been.**
Confident as an athlete, and confident as a person. Confident that my
body is not broken, confident that I’m strong, and confident that I can
hang with the best. While I might have failed to live up to the
expectations Laz had for the “year of the woman,” I’m at peace knowing
that I gave everything I could and left it all out on the course in
those conditions, and knowing that I’m capable of more.

That’s not to say that I’m satisfied.

The entire experience out there lit a fire. I couldn’t sleep the night
after my race ended, so I sat in my minivan pouring over the course
directions and map while it was still fresh in my mind, writing down
everything I could remember. “Out There” exposed my weaknesses, and I’m
giddy with the thought of tackling those.

Many people opine on whether a woman can finish Barkley. I believe one
can, but it’s going to take a ballsy run. Those same people ask me
whether I think I can finish. I think John Kelly said it best to me the
other day: **“I don’t know that you can. But I don’t know that you
CAN’T. And that’s the best that can be said of anyone at Barkley.”**

He’s right. It takes the perfect lightning strike of EVERYTHING going
right in a race where there are so many variables. One mistake –
navigational, gear, nutrition – can derail you in this race where there
is no margin for error. And that doesn’t count the factors that are
beyond your control – weather, start time, course conditions, wild dogs
(asked Guillaume about that one).

So I tip my hat to you, Laz, and the Barkley course. **You won. But that
doesn’t mean I lost.** I gained confidence, peace, trust in my body, and
a new purpose. And damn straight – that’s where the magic happens. You
better believe I’ll be carrying those in my arsenal if given the
opportunity to face the Barkley Marathons again.

**Failure is how you define it. And it’s never final. **

class="embedpress-wrapper ose-youtube ose-uid-48754a117192c122cf903bb1f9f36223 responsive">


**EPILOGUE, SHOUT OUT, THANKS**

Hands down, Barkley was by far the hardest race I’ve ever taken on, and
I’m forever grateful to be given that opportunity, especially knowing
how hard it is to gain acceptance now.  I had been expecting the
difficulty, but it’s impossible to grasp that until you experience it.
While yes, you move much slower than a “regular” ultra, the combination
of 40% grade ascents/descents, off-trail technical terrain, and
navigational prowess takes a different kind of athlete. You can’t just
shut your brain off and run. You have to use your brain constantly, not
just for navigation, but to be able to keep your cool WHEN things go
wrong. Because they will. **Many folks don’t have that capacity to right
the sinking ship – those who do well at Barkley do.** And for that
unique combination of reasons, I fully believe Barkley finishers are
some of the best athletes out there. Utmost respect to all finishers,
and those that I know have that finish in them (especially Gary,
Guillaume, Johan, Jamil, Jodi) – not a matter of if, but when.

First and foremost, a huge thank you to my crew, Chris Hanlon. We’d
never met before, yet he flew cross-country to spent a week in the
woods, and was absolutely incredible. And to coach [David
Roche](http://swaprunning.com) -– thank you for indulging me in my
adventures and supporting me along the way.

To my sponsors –[HumanN](http://humans.com),
[RockTape](http://rocktape.com), [Ultimate
Direction](http://ultimatedirection.com), [Sufferfest
Beer](http://sufferfestbeer.com), [Reebok](http://reebok.com). Thank you
for being so supportive even though I told you I couldn’t talk about
this or announce it – I realize that’s a sponsor’s worst nightmare. And
to [Premiere Spine and Sports](http://premierespineandsport.com) and Dr.
Justin Brink for getting me to that start line healthy.

To my fellow 2018 competitors – so great to share adventures with you.
To the veterans who were so kind in sharing words of wisdom – [John
Kelly](http://www.randomforestrunner.com), [Gary
Robbins](http://garyrobbinsrun.com), [Jamil Coury](http://runsteep.com),
Jodi Isenor, Johan Steene. To my fellow virgins, especially my lovely
ladies Maggie Guterl and Steph Case, and to John Burton, who is way
faster than me, but graciously stayed with me.

To the old timers sharing stories around the fire. To the fellow women
of Barkley out there. To[Keith Dunn](https://twitter.com/keithdunn), our
fearless Tweeter (and lover of musical theatre!) And, of course, to Laz:
that’s a fun course you’ve got out there.

[![](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/fullsizeoutput_1da2-300x225.jpeg){.size-medium
.wp-image-731 .aligncenter width="300" height="225"
sizes="(max-width: 300px) 100vw, 300px"
srcset="http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/fullsizeoutput_1da2-300x225.jpeg 300w, http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/fullsizeoutput_1da2-768x576.jpeg 768w, http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/fullsizeoutput_1da2-1024x768.jpeg 1024w"}](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/fullsizeoutput_1da2.jpeg)

———-

**STATS (completely entirely 100% accurate based on my Timex Walmart
watch that stopped working after Loop 1)**

-   26 miles per loop
-   15,000 ft of climbing per loop
-   Pre-race Pop-Tart flavor: Cinnamon Roll
-   Song on repeat (only in my head): Bishop Brigg’s “White Flag”
-   Hashtag: \#bringingstupidback

**THINGS THAT DID NOT WORK WELL/LESSONS LEARNED**

-   I broke my thumb a few weeks prior to Barkley. Using poles with a
    broken thumb is a bitch and a half.
-   Speaking of poles, this was the first time I’ve ever raced with
    them. I should have probably done something shorter than a 30 hour
    effort for a first go around.
-   Waist lights are life savers for the fog. I did not have one.
-   Work. On. Technical Descending. Self-preservation has to go out the
    window on this one.
-   Trails in California are horrendous training for this –
    well-groomed, no roots or rocks, with grades that top out at 15-20%.
    I figured that out way too late this year.
-   Trying to rest against saplings that can’t hold your weight (that
    never ends up well…)

**THINGS THAT WORKED WELL**

-   Ultimate Direction [Adventure
    Vesta](https://ultimatedirection.com/adventure-vesta-4-0/) (plenty
    of capacity, held up well among briars)
-   [Rocktape H20](http://shop.rocktape.com/2-h2o-black-extra-sticky/) –
    preventively taped around my toes to guard against blisters and
    maceration, and no issues
-   Injinji compression socks with thin wool liner socks over – I solely
    run in Injinjis, and have for years, but added the wool liner. No
    blisters, no maceration, feet never got cold.
-   [BeetElite](http://humann.com) before (and interloopal!); beer after
-   [Moxie Gear Shin
    Gators](https://www.moxiegear.com.au/moxie-shin-gaiters): everyone
    was jealous of my briar whacking shields
-   [BleggMitts](https://www.bleggmit.com.au): I have a history of
    frostbite in my fingers, so my hands get cold very easily,
    especially when wet. We use BleggMitts for OCR, but they worked
    beautifully here. And held up really well! Hands only got cold for
    one brief moment.
-   Upper body strength: Gary pointed out to me before the race that he
    thought my upper body strength from OCR would be key in this race,
    and I agree. The amount of scrambling and climbing you have to do
    taxes the upper body (in fact, my upper body was MORE sore than my
    lower body).
-   When traction fails, crawling on hands and knees (thanks OCR for
    making me proficient there!)
-   Compression base layer with wool mid-layer. Goretex jacket during
    rains. Extra packs of Handwarmers.
-   Eating real food – the calorie deficient out there is real. [Bizzy
    coffee shots](https://www.bizzycoffee.com) for caffeine (though I
    only needed one…it was only a 30 hour race?)

**RANDOM THOUGHTS**

-   I’ve heard Barkley naysayers chatter about how if a “top”
    ultrarunner showed up, one who was super fast, they’d just crush it.
    And that the reason that so few athletes finish is that because no
    “real” athletes show up. False. False. False. False. I do believe
    speed is necessary and helpful, but speed alone isn’t going to help
    you.
-   I swore that if I was in a bad patch, I was going to yell out “THIS
    IS FUCKING AWESOME” every few minutes. Luckily, I never needed to
    use it. Because it was awesome (ya can’t stop me from having fun,
    Laz)

[![](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/vW7Zeg5oQZa8QsqXqee7GA-e1522670030415-300x225.jpg){.alignnone
.size-medium .wp-image-749 width="300" height="225"
sizes="(max-width: 300px) 100vw, 300px"
srcset="http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/vW7Zeg5oQZa8QsqXqee7GA-e1522670030415-300x225.jpg 300w, http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/vW7Zeg5oQZa8QsqXqee7GA-e1522670030415-768x576.jpg 768w, http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/vW7Zeg5oQZa8QsqXqee7GA-e1522670030415-1024x768.jpg 1024w"}](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/vW7Zeg5oQZa8QsqXqee7GA-e1522670030415.jpg)

class="addtoany_share_save_container addtoany_content addtoany_content_bottom">

data-a2a-url="http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/"
data-a2a-title="The 2018 Barkley Marathons: Confidence through Failure">

[](https://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ameliabooneracing.com%2Fblog%2Fultramarathons%2Fbarkley2018%2F&linkname=The%202018%20Barkley%20Marathons%3A%20Confidence%20through%20Failure "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}[](https://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ameliabooneracing.com%2Fblog%2Fultramarathons%2Fbarkley2018%2F&linkname=The%202018%20Barkley%20Marathons%3A%20Confidence%20through%20Failure "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}[](https://www.addtoany.com/add_to/email?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ameliabooneracing.com%2Fblog%2Fultramarathons%2Fbarkley2018%2F&linkname=The%202018%20Barkley%20Marathons%3A%20Confidence%20through%20Failure "Email"){.a2a_button_email}[![Share](https://static.addtoany.com/buttons/favicon.png)](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd
.addtoany_share_save .addtoany_share}




Post navigation {#post-navigation .screen-reader-text}
===============


[[Previous Post]{.meta-nav}A Year of Return to Running
Logs](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/rehab/year-return-running-logs/)



59 thoughts on “The 2018 Barkley Marathons: Confidence through Failure” {#thoughts-on-the-2018-barkley-marathons-confidence-through-failure .comments-title}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------




    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/9faee3ef6f19ecb5272ebff10aacb90c?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/9faee3ef6f19ecb5272ebff10aacb90c?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **[Big Johnny Burton](http://runningjohn.blogspot.com){.url}**
    [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 4:36
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11073)



    Best Barkley race report I’ve read this year! I loved your comment
    that you were planning to yell out “THIS IS FUCKING AWESOME” if you
    found yourself in a bad patch. Similarly, I always yell, “This
    sucks… I love how much this sucks… I wish this would suck more!”,
    whenever I hit a rough spot 🙂



    [Reply](#comment-11073){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/ef5b03d48f08905ead9f2bd9a7f2ef3b?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/ef5b03d48f08905ead9f2bd9a7f2ef3b?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Henry** [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 4:54
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11074)



    Great report. Next year again!



    [Reply](#comment-11074){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/01a59cc8b5927e009269d25d5aaa59d4?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/01a59cc8b5927e009269d25d5aaa59d4?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **[Sean Grove](http://sfbayduck.blogspot.com){.url}** [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 5:57
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11075)



    Great report, thanks for sharing! Looking forward to following along
    again when you go back! And I’m going to steal both your and
    Johnny’s mantras for my next in-race low spot.



    [Reply](#comment-11075){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6f01af141955cf5ee4c631595029b4b2?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6f01af141955cf5ee4c631595029b4b2?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Mike Nixon** [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 6:11
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11076)



    Great race report Amelia! Thank you for sharing it. My favorite
    line, because we all know it’s true of you, “Perhaps,” I thought,
    “Rat Jaw will be better. The saw briars will provide traction.” For
    me, that pretty well sums up the warrior mentality and grit
    necessary to persevere through the worst imaginable circumstances.
    Now if I could just figure out how to enjoy it half as much as you
    do 🙂



    [Reply](#comment-11076){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cd95dd665fc4f89abebb49b79d229b09?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cd95dd665fc4f89abebb49b79d229b09?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **thomas marino** [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 6:18
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11077)



    best race recap and LIFE tips ever! thanks A Boone! Way to represent
    OCR!



    [Reply](#comment-11077){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/e6ec956fddc370f67df58b55bc2530f9?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/e6ec956fddc370f67df58b55bc2530f9?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Carrie Connors** [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 7:08
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11078)



    Loved reading this! You never fail to amaze me with your strength,
    grit, honesty, vulnerability and grace. Keep doing what you’re
    doing! &lt;3



    [Reply](#comment-11078){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6dede609be77383584e4692fdd35000e?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6dede609be77383584e4692fdd35000e?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Lisa** [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 7:26
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11079)



    Loved reading every word of this!! Two of my favorite things:
    Barkley Marathon and Amelia Boone! \#admirefromafar \#maybeoneday
    \#fitover50



    [Reply](#comment-11079){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1db3489d4a33844f41e6b7535d5080a8?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1db3489d4a33844f41e6b7535d5080a8?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **[Chris](http://chrisultra.blogspot.com/){.url}** [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 8:05
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11080)



    “Is that all you got Barkley!?” is another good shout-out in tough
    times. Awesome race report. Well done. You’ll get a fun run in next
    year. Maybe even the full Barkley! Good luck.



    [Reply](#comment-11080){.comment-reply-link}





        ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/625d5cf103adb211a279e8b0934ab3c5?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
        .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
        srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/625d5cf103adb211a279e8b0934ab3c5?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
        **admin** [says:]{.says}



        [April 3, 2018 at 1:15
        am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11094)



        hahah I’ll add that one to my yells!



        [Reply](#comment-11094){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cecc00a88dd2171b3bd4bbf213882b6d?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cecc00a88dd2171b3bd4bbf213882b6d?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Rick** [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 8:19
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11081)



    Highly interesting read! Thanks for sharing. You really did look
    like you had fun out there in Jamil’s video. I am looking forward to
    what you can accomplish at Barkley in the upcoming years.



    [Reply](#comment-11081){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b21a632915319a9b5b10a921c810868f?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b21a632915319a9b5b10a921c810868f?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Chris Daugherty** [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 9:08
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11086)



    You are inspirational to a man who has never run a marathon, much
    less the Barkley… never wave your white flag.



    [Reply](#comment-11086){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f8fbe2cebf090cc74688fad059a5e265?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f8fbe2cebf090cc74688fad059a5e265?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Dave Gibson** [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 9:47
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11087)



    If this post doesn’t pump you up and make you want to jump
    head-first into terrifying adventures, then I don’t know what will!
    You are truly an inspiration for me and my daughters, Amelia.



    [Reply](#comment-11087){.comment-reply-link}





        ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/625d5cf103adb211a279e8b0934ab3c5?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
        .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
        srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/625d5cf103adb211a279e8b0934ab3c5?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
        **admin** [says:]{.says}



        [April 3, 2018 at 1:14
        am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11093)



        thank you so much – that means the world to me!



        [Reply](#comment-11093){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/34aaf16b3abe3fbb7873f6c416f1850d?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/34aaf16b3abe3fbb7873f6c416f1850d?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **stacie brennise** [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 9:59
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11088)



    who is your coach



    [Reply](#comment-11088){.comment-reply-link}





        ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/625d5cf103adb211a279e8b0934ab3c5?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
        .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
        srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/625d5cf103adb211a279e8b0934ab3c5?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
        **admin** [says:]{.says}



        [April 3, 2018 at 1:14
        am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11092)



        David Roche!



        [Reply](#comment-11092){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/bd1ac24372817ae26cc5135f564e9fd8?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/bd1ac24372817ae26cc5135f564e9fd8?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Irene Boone** [says:]{.says}



    [April 2, 2018 at 11:03
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11089)



    Excellent race report. I worried about you as your mom but I also
    had confidence in your abilities and grit. I’m so proud of you.



    [Reply](#comment-11089){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/3f6dcc6c86cda71915b1eb298408b30c?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/3f6dcc6c86cda71915b1eb298408b30c?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Kirk O'Brien** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 12:33
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11090)



    Thanks for sharing. I’m glad you found peace, trust, confidence,
    etc. I look forward to seeing what the new spark does for your
    adventure career. What’s next Navy SEAL training?



    [Reply](#comment-11090){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/5bce7a5b6208b93da8db4382309c3063?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/5bce7a5b6208b93da8db4382309c3063?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Derek Wilson** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 1:57
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11095)



    Great race report Amelia!! Quite an effort out there. You are a huge
    inspiration to me as I go from Ironman triathlons to trail ultra
    running.



    [Reply](#comment-11095){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/e9d4038d040e13afbc9fbb736851db49?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/e9d4038d040e13afbc9fbb736851db49?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Michelle Hughes** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 1:58
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11096)



    This was fantastic! Thank you and, congratulations!



    [Reply](#comment-11096){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f2994314dc9bbd56c917f5fda39a32ed?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f2994314dc9bbd56c917f5fda39a32ed?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Trey Gore** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 2:05
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11097)



    I truly enjoyed everything you gave us about this race and your
    fears leading up to it. My fear is that I have discovered OCR and
    ultras to late in life… in particular Barkley’s\
    I honestly think you’re going to be a finisher of this race one day.
    You’ve seen it and you’ve got this…



    [Reply](#comment-11097){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/99fcd83fb062c08e38e7c35576da1a97?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/99fcd83fb062c08e38e7c35576da1a97?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Larry Kelley** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 2:46
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11099)



    Outstanding in all aspects. Hope to see u back next year! Great
    reflection of the good, the bad and the ugly. Well Done!



    [Reply](#comment-11099){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/63d1732564fc79ff853baec1a8e81072?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/63d1732564fc79ff853baec1a8e81072?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Steph** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 3:12
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11100)



    Amelia, thanks for this post! What a fun post and a solid race! I
    just found you through Keith Dunn’s twitter. I am rooting for you
    for a fun run and a Barkley finish in the future, but more than
    anything I am rooting that it always stays fun for you!

    Your posts on your recovery are SO cathartic and you’re so honest
    and clear about what you went going through psychologically. I ran
    my first trail marathon last year and I’ve been recovering now from
    knee issues for about a year and I’ve been going through so many of
    the same ups and downs. I’m just feeling so motivated by your
    writing! I’ll be following you!

    ALSO not that finishing is that important (I really don’t think it
    is!) but your post makes me think it’s a lot more likely a woman
    will finish! It seems like the race is now tapping a wider pool of
    female racers. On Twitter we looked at this a few years ago, and it
    seems like a main reason so few women have Fun-Runned and none have
    finished is that far fewer women have toed the starting line. It’d
    be interesting to see what would happen if there was gender parity
    in the starting field every year for ten years. Sure, there must be
    some gender physiology there, but I’d bet my big toe that statistics
    are part of what’s happening!

    You’re going to be my go-to inspiration reading as I get into my own
    come-back race this fall! Keeping kick ass! Love you!



    [Reply](#comment-11100){.comment-reply-link}





        ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/625d5cf103adb211a279e8b0934ab3c5?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
        .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
        srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/625d5cf103adb211a279e8b0934ab3c5?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
        **admin** [says:]{.says}



        [April 3, 2018 at 12:02
        pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11109)



        Thank you for the kind words! Yeah, I think people also don’t
        realize that although this was the “year of the woman,” meaning
        Laz let in more than usual, we were still only 9 out of 40
        runners. I have no idea what the percentage is based on overall
        applicant pool, but one day, we’ll get there! And best to you in
        your injury recovery!



        [Reply](#comment-11109){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/dcdb6cab479a425cd8311d951efe4fd6?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/dcdb6cab479a425cd8311d951efe4fd6?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Katie** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 3:22
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11101)



    Awesome report. I follow your inspirational story and humorous
    thoughts on Twitter. When I didn’t see you post for a few weeks I
    was worried maybe you had an injury set back. Sounds like the
    opposite. Awesome news and great job.



    [Reply](#comment-11101){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/075f9c75504e05b3aaf622ad13a391d9?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/075f9c75504e05b3aaf622ad13a391d9?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **ROBERT T GOUDIE** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 4:56
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11103)



    This report WAS FUCKING AWESOME. Thanks, Amelia.



    [Reply](#comment-11103){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fdd1c788df3eb3d59c9c169466633605?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fdd1c788df3eb3d59c9c169466633605?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **[Jason](http://runningalive.com){.url}** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 5:04
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11104)



    Well written, I feel like you gave some justice to the event in your
    words. That wouldn’t be easy to do.

    The Barkley Marathons touches even those who haven’t done it. Thank
    you for adding to the inspiration to get more out of ourselves. I
    think you said it best with “the journey through self doubt is one
    worth taking.”



    [Reply](#comment-11104){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d16f1042ac0cf393d7ad1bfeac19eb24?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d16f1042ac0cf393d7ad1bfeac19eb24?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **L** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 5:55
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11105)



    You. are. amazing! Thanks for an excellent and well written race
    re-cap. I was pretty excited to discover you were racing this year.
    While you were running with some other very talented women, you are
    the one I think will be the first female finisher. Can’t wait to see
    what happens whenever you return!



    [Reply](#comment-11105){.comment-reply-link}





    Pingback: [Ultramarathon Daily News | Tuesday, Apr 3 |
    Ultrarunnerpodcast](https://ultrarunnerpodcast.com/ultramarathon-daily-news-tuesday-apr-3/){.url}





    ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/460874855b4e1f8a342c5d6d848541a7?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/460874855b4e1f8a342c5d6d848541a7?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **George Clark** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 3:03
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11111)



    Terrific virgin race report ! There’s no quit in you ! That’s the
    spirit – take out positives in your race @ Barkley !\
    A friend of mine is coached by Gary and everything you saw from him
    and Linda is exactly who they are ! She finished Tor de Geants in
    the fall of 2017 – that was an adventure !\
    I live in the same area as Jodi in Nova Scotia ! He used to do lots
    of adventure racing years ago with a racing partner of his, but this
    is Barkley !\
    All the best in your new adventures !



    [Reply](#comment-11111){.comment-reply-link}





        ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/625d5cf103adb211a279e8b0934ab3c5?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
        .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
        srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/625d5cf103adb211a279e8b0934ab3c5?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
        **admin** [says:]{.says}



        [April 3, 2018 at 4:27
        pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11119)



        thank you! Gary, Linda, and Jodi are amazing. Such a great crew
        🙂



        [Reply](#comment-11119){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/a8ec3c5bd2ac5dec2d395f6170bf850d?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/a8ec3c5bd2ac5dec2d395f6170bf850d?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Jason** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 3:35
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11113)



    Great recap!!! I always love the honesty and humor in your stories.
    Such an inspiration to us all. Keep up the great work and can’t wait
    to hear about it next year.



    [Reply](#comment-11113){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/67272bd0e98ee407acc5046dcf78dd77?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/67272bd0e98ee407acc5046dcf78dd77?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Evan** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 4:01
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11115)



    Thanks so much for the great report – you rocked it!



    [Reply](#comment-11115){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/e873679489c0b57743e65335f07d5dd4?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/e873679489c0b57743e65335f07d5dd4?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Guillermo** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 4:08
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11118)



    Great read and so fffnn inspiring, you are so correct that is not a
    DNF it is a victory, this is no ordinary tough ultra. This bring the
    small group of runners who are able to get in to hell and back and
    they return again and again because they want to finish it. It takes
    a special breed of people who want to embark on this challenge and
    push themselves beyond the limits and I salute them. This quote is
    so true “the more something scares you, the more you should run
    towards it”. Oh and btw this was hilarious “one win for navigational
    peeing”.



    [Reply](#comment-11118){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cf5d146c0c7d9c6c612a02752f2214ed?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cf5d146c0c7d9c6c612a02752f2214ed?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Heather Norton-Bower** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 6:22
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11121)



    In total awe reading through this and watching Jamil’s video. If I
    were younger and not 45, I’d maybe think of doing something like
    this someday! Love David Roche’s coaching tips on Trairunner. Used
    them for training for my first ultras this past year, a 50k and then
    100k. Can’t wait to hear next year’s Barkley race report! And
    reading through some of your old articles, yes I’d have to say aqua
    jogging is BS ;). Working through my own overuse injury right
    now…Upper TFL where it inserts along ilium…ugh!



    [Reply](#comment-11121){.comment-reply-link}





        ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4f1e20fa7f276249580d4919c06bec96?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
        .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
        srcset="http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4f1e20fa7f276249580d4919c06bec96?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
        **Steve Pero** [says:]{.says}



        [April 3, 2018 at 10:33
        pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11129)



        Heather….I was 50 the year I finished the fun run. Granted they
        claim it was easier back in ’01, but Barkley was never easy. So
        I go for it!

        Congrats on your experience, Amelia…you will rock it next year!



        [Reply](#comment-11129){.comment-reply-link}





            ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4f1e20fa7f276249580d4919c06bec96?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
            .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
            srcset="http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4f1e20fa7f276249580d4919c06bec96?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
            **Steve Pero** [says:]{.says}



            [April 3, 2018 at 10:35
            pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11130)



            That should say…so I say go for it! 😉



            [Reply](#comment-11130){.comment-reply-link}





            ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/625d5cf103adb211a279e8b0934ab3c5?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
            .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
            srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/625d5cf103adb211a279e8b0934ab3c5?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
            **admin** [says:]{.says}



            [April 3, 2018 at 11:01
            pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11131)



            thank you! Yes, actually I think that older (errrr, “more
            seasoned”) runners tend to fare better – just have the
            mental wherewithal and time on feet necessary to handle it.



            [Reply](#comment-11131){.comment-reply-link}





                ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cf5d146c0c7d9c6c612a02752f2214ed?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
                .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
                srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cf5d146c0c7d9c6c612a02752f2214ed?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
                **Heather Norton-Bower** [says:]{.says}



                [April 7, 2018 at 6:41
                am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11215)



                I guess that could be true!



                [Reply](#comment-11215){.comment-reply-link}





            ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cf5d146c0c7d9c6c612a02752f2214ed?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
            .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
            srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cf5d146c0c7d9c6c612a02752f2214ed?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
            **Heather Norton-Bower** [says:]{.says}



            [April 7, 2018 at 6:39
            am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11214)



            Hmmmmm…if my TFL ever stops giving me grief maybe I’ll
            consider it! When one is dealing w an injury it feels like
            one will be forever injured! I need to remember, this too
            shall pass ;).

            Great job in your past Barkley!



            [Reply](#comment-11214){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6263fb4f03fe112b2ed76e261a84d72e?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6263fb4f03fe112b2ed76e261a84d72e?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **BranSCombe** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 6:49
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11122)



    Thanks for sharing, this gives us mere mortals who will never tackle
    this course a sense of what it’s like, an unbelievable challenge and
    experience. Super success to you moving forward.



    [Reply](#comment-11122){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/edefed97d2c446affb12186168b99972?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/edefed97d2c446affb12186168b99972?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Jarad** [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 8:12
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11125)



    Awesome report! I was at Barkley this year and I loved your spirit
    and resolve, especially to head back out there in the torrential
    rain. I hope you can return next year as well!



    [Reply](#comment-11125){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7c647c91f002495aa205aaac85824196?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7c647c91f002495aa205aaac85824196?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **[Stephen Duke](http://stephenduke813.weebly.com){.url}**
    [says:]{.says}



    [April 3, 2018 at 9:57
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11126)



    Mesmerizing Race Report! I’m inspired to sign up for a Mountain Half
    that takes place in November. Uh, yeah…totally out of my comfort
    zone and I’ve only been running trails for a few months (previously
    I was a BC runner…Boring Concrete). I will enjoy that Mountain Half
    and maybe yell “THIS IS FUCKING AWESOME!”\
    😀



    [Reply](#comment-11126){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6d3839f2c6b99b122e3ecc27e9fc34ec?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6d3839f2c6b99b122e3ecc27e9fc34ec?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Beth** [says:]{.says}



    [April 4, 2018 at 12:38
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11134)



    “By giving myself the permission to try, I could not fail.”

    Inspiring report and incredible effort. You are the definition of
    bad ass.



    [Reply](#comment-11134){.comment-reply-link}





    Pingback: [This weeks links (2018-04-02) | Visible
    Procrastinations](https://visibleprocrastinations.wordpress.com/2018/04/02/this-weeks-links-2018-04-02/){.url}





    ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1981936514e4e4ed96a75063ce53f4c8?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1981936514e4e4ed96a75063ce53f4c8?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Roy** [says:]{.says}



    [April 4, 2018 at 2:57
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11136)



    Great effort, something to be very proud of. However I don’t think
    “I can’t stop smiling” was the effect Laz was going for. You’re just
    encouraging him to make it harder 🙂



    [Reply](#comment-11136){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b2919271036f6606d15888f5f99e7247?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b2919271036f6606d15888f5f99e7247?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Brian** [says:]{.says}



    [April 4, 2018 at 4:42
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11138)



    I must have missed the glossary.\
    What’s the definition of Type I and Type II fun?\
    Great report! Thanks for sharing your story.



    [Reply](#comment-11138){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/bce2c262323e4c1a1be606bf03e46516?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/bce2c262323e4c1a1be606bf03e46516?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Fausto** [says:]{.says}



    [April 4, 2018 at 5:10
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11156)



    Inspiring & Awesome!!\
    You got yourself a new fan from Guatemala C.A.



    [Reply](#comment-11156){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/941aa11f9d6eba42ca64ae9173a69561?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/941aa11f9d6eba42ca64ae9173a69561?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **[Kristin Parker](https://www.thekristinparker.com){.url}**
    [says:]{.says}



    [April 5, 2018 at 2:36
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11168)



    Loved reading this! “The more something scares you, the more you
    should run towards it.” Words to live by. I took on my first WTM
    last year for my 40th birthday present to myself not knowing if I
    would survive the 24 hours. It was hands down one of the best
    experiences of my life and I’ll always have those memories now. You
    never know if you can unless you try. I know you will be back out
    there next year smiling and having fun. I wish you much luck that
    everything comes together on the 2nd go!



    [Reply](#comment-11168){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/3319d42db2ab189710ceb902acd1b524?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/3319d42db2ab189710ceb902acd1b524?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Jackson B. Boyd** [says:]{.says}



    [April 6, 2018 at 2:21
    am](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11191)



    Thank you! That was awesome, you are a very good writer as well as a
    great athlete and a Barkley Veteran. Congratulations. Look forward
    to seeing you next year!



    [Reply](#comment-11191){.comment-reply-link}





    Pingback: [High Five Friday -Happy Fit
    Mama](http://www.happyfitmama.com/high-five-friday-183/){.url}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6e2ca0e9bd5eb0de725ce85da5fc0b02?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6e2ca0e9bd5eb0de725ce85da5fc0b02?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Jane Coffe** [says:]{.says}



    [April 6, 2018 at 11:58
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11208)



    xoxooxoxoxoxoxo!!!

    so glad you kept it quiet and focused on yourself. So smart.

    Big love! Amazing fun!



    [Reply](#comment-11208){.comment-reply-link}





    Pingback: [The Women of the World's Most Infamous Race –
    Health](https://fer4.com/health/the-women-of-the-worlds-most-infamous-race/){.url}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/89ae204ea86cf974e90f788e5d94c7dc?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/89ae204ea86cf974e90f788e5d94c7dc?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Tim** [says:]{.says}



    [April 7, 2018 at 12:34
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11220)



    I just want to say thank you. Reading this is refreshing and
    motivating. Your honest account and attitude give readers a nice
    glimpse into your positive outlook. As I get a bit older, I begin to
    doubt my body and abilities. Thanks for helping me realize that it’s
    always worth going after something you believe in.



    [Reply](#comment-11220){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/8f04d865f4444aa28d6e631462c87b03?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/8f04d865f4444aa28d6e631462c87b03?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Robin La Tourette** [says:]{.says}



    [April 7, 2018 at 3:16
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11229)



    such a great recap! reading it felt like being there…..well, from
    the comfort of my bed with the cat purring beside me. but other than
    that, I was right there.

    as others have said, favorite part was “the more something scares
    you, the more you should run towards it” and also “the journey
    through self-doubt is one worth taking”. I try to do the first
    often, and need to remember the second is ok.

    thanks for sharing this….the good, bad, and keeping the attitude of
    fun….so inspiring! I’ll remember this in my next adventure….whether
    fun (Bear Grylls Survival Challenge) or just life in general. look
    forward to cheering you on next year!



    [Reply](#comment-11229){.comment-reply-link}





    Pingback: [Hump Day Adventure Inspiration volume 2 - It's Quality
    Gear](https://itsqualitygear.com/hump-day-adventure-inspiration-volume-2/){.url}





    ![](http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/353555512964f56c32496239745ab962?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://0.gravatar.com/avatar/353555512964f56c32496239745ab962?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **Jen Larson** [says:]{.says}



    [May 7, 2018 at 5:26
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-11747)



    You are amazing and so inspiring! Thanks for sharing your recap.



    [Reply](#comment-11747){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/41841e930802676ac0f77bec75eeb36c?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://1.gravatar.com/avatar/41841e930802676ac0f77bec75eeb36c?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **[IG](http://plantypower.com){.url}** [says:]{.says}



    [June 1, 2018 at 6:40
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-12464)



    Great recap! I saw a documentary about this race a while ago. Oh my
    lord lady, you are amazing just to have the guts to start! Thanks to
    women like you, I recently started running. You passion is
    contagious! True inspiration! 🙂



    [Reply](#comment-12464){.comment-reply-link}





    ![](http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/25d6b000ea26f79f9efc68b4e79cc650?s=34&d=mm&r=g){.avatar
    .avatar-34 .photo width="34" height="34"
    srcset="http://2.gravatar.com/avatar/25d6b000ea26f79f9efc68b4e79cc650?s=68&d=mm&r=g 2x"}
    **[Dr. Cowan's Garden](https://www.drcowansgarden.com/){.url}**
    [says:]{.says}



    [July 13, 2018 at 2:31
    pm](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/#comment-13512)



    Great race report Amelia! Thanks for the sharing.



    [Reply](#comment-13512){.comment-reply-link}





    Pingback: [Only 15 people have ever finished the gruelling and
    secretive Barkley Marathons — here's what the race is like,
    according to people who've tried | Business
    Insider](https://www.businessinsider.com.au/barkley-marathons-what-the-race-is-like-2018-8){.url}


[Search for:]{.screen-reader-text}
Recent Posts {#recent-posts .widget-title}
============

-   [The 2018 Barkley Marathons: Confidence through
    Failure](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/ultramarathons/barkley2018/)
-   [A Year of Return to Running
    Logs](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/rehab/year-return-running-logs/)
-   [2017: A Year of Rediscovering
    Joy](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/spartan/2017-year-rediscovering-joy/)
-   [Rewriting the
    Script](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/worldstoughestmudder/rewritingthescript/)
-   [The Injury
    Commandments](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/rehab/the-injury-commandments/)

Archives {#archives .widget-title}
========

-   [April 2018](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2018/04/)
-   [January 2018](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2018/01/)
-   [November 2017](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2017/11/)
-   [August 2017](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2017/08/)
-   [June 2017](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2017/06/)
-   [April 2017](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2017/04/)
-   [December 2016](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2016/12/)
-   [September 2016](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2016/09/)
-   [July 2016](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2016/07/)
-   [June 2016](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2016/06/)
-   [May 2016](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2016/05/)
-   [April 2016](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2016/04/)
-   [February 2016](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2016/02/)
-   [December 2015](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2015/12/)
-   [November 2015](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2015/11/)
-   [March 2015](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2015/03/)
-   [December 2014](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2014/12/)
-   [November 2014](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2014/11/)
-   [May 2014](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2014/05/)
-   [February 2014](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2014/02/)
-   [November 2013](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2013/11/)
-   [September 2013](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2013/09/)
-   [July 2013](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2013/07/)
-   [June 2013](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2013/06/)
-   [May 2013](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2013/05/)
-   [April 2013](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2013/04/)
-   [February 2013](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2013/02/)
-   [January 2013](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2013/01/)
-   [December 2012](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2012/12/)
-   [November 2012](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2012/11/)
-   [October 2012](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2012/10/)
-   [September 2012](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2012/09/)
-   [July 2012](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2012/07/)
-   [June 2012](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2012/06/)
-   [May 2012](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2012/05/)
-   [April 2012](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2012/04/)
-   [March 2012](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2012/03/)
-   [February 2012](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2012/02/)
-   [January 2012](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2012/01/)
-   [December 2011](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/2011/12/)

Categories {#categories .widget-title}
==========

-   [Death
    Race](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/category/deathrace/) (15)
-   [Injury, Rehab and
    Recovery](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/category/rehab/) (15)
-   [Spartan](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/category/spartan/) (12)
-   [Ultramarathons](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/category/ultramarathons/) (6)
-   [Uncategorized](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/category/uncategorized/) (51)
-   [World's Toughest
    Mudder](http://www.ameliabooneracing.com/blog/category/worldstoughestmudder/) (12)





[Proudly powered by WordPress](https://wordpress.org/)
