2. Off-grid life is simple, but not uncomplicated

> *One of the great appeals of off-grid living is that it allows you to practice a form of voluntary simplicity based in frugality, sustainability, self-sufficiency and resilience. The "voluntary" part refers to a deliberate act of choice: an awakening leading to a lifestyle conversion. The awakening consists of gaining the critical awareness that global society has spun out of control.* 

8. Off-grid living isn't for everybody

> *Living off-grid is a lot of work. It is very difficult for two partners who work full-time outside the home to live off-grid. // Living off-grid on one's own might also be too difficult for people who are not physically able to take care of certain chores (firewood-chopping easily comes to mind). // But ultimately off-grid living is not for people who expect things NOW, who want no involvement in the way a home works, who are not ready to adapt and make the occasional sacrifice to consumption habits, and who are not interested in understanding basic principles of ecology or mechanics. // With all this said, off-grid households need never sacrifice on necessities. Of the 100 homes we visited, 98 had Internet (very few, on the other hand, had cable or satellite television)!*

10. Off-grid living isn't the magic bullet solution to the world's problems

> Off-grid living can teach volumes about ethical and responsible consumption, resource conservation, sustainability, resilience and adaptation. Yet, it is not THE answer to global energy scarcity. // It makes little sense, from a planning and engineering perspective, to isolate ourselves into small, separate, fully-independent atom-like homes. It makes more sense to pool and share resources whenever possible, and to all play a fair role in doing so. Off-grid living can then teach us about learning that role, about what it means to do our part. // Our energy futures won't be characterized by a simple, magic solution but rather by many diverse renewable resource technologies sensitive to local conditions and responsive to changing needs and intelligent, responsible demand. It is in this sense that off-grid living can be understood: as an experiment, happening today, to solving the problems that we will all need to face tomorrow.

******

By Phillip Vannini and Jonathan Taggert / [The Tyee](http://www.thetyee.ca/)

*December 29, 2014, 11:15 AM GMT*

It was in 2011 that I first understood what off-grid living really
meant. Before then I had heard people claim they were off-grid if they
switched their cell phone off for a day or two. Other people thought
anyone who lived in remote places was off-grid. None of that made any
sense. It was when I first visited British Columbia's [Lasqueti
Island](//thetyee.ca/Life/2012/06/14/Living-Off-the-Grid-On-Lasqueti/)
and later the floating home community of [Clayoquot
Sound](//thetyee.ca/Life/2012/01/24/Living-Off-The-Grid-In-BC/) that I
got a real taste of the off-grid life: life, that is, in a place
disconnected from large natural gas and electricity networks.

For the next two years, photographer/videographer Jonathan Taggart and I
travelled close to 105,000 kilometres together across Canada to find
people who live off-the-grid and visit them in their homes. Occasionally
we lived with them for a short period of time. Sometimes we followed
them around as they fished, harvested, collected wood and built or fixed
their homes. And we too practiced living in off-grid homes and cabins
for short stretches of time. Overall we visited about 100 homes and
interviewed about 200 off-grid Canadians, as well as many American and
British expats living in Canada. We managed to find off-gridders in
every single province and territory, and through our [book and
forthcoming film](//lifeoffgrid.ca) we narrated our travels and
chronicled the experiences, challenges, inventions, aspirations and ways
of life of a few of them.


To make our travels and encounters with off-gridders possible, Jonathan
and I had to fly on dozens of planes, ride snowmobiles, paddle kayaks
and canoes, walk in snowshoes, ride ATVs, sail on ferries and small
boats, bike and trek across many beautiful regions of our country. Our
encounters with off-gridders young and old, far and near and rich and
poor inspired us to reflect not only about off-grid life in itself, but
also to question our collective, modern, *on*-grid way of life. The
lessons we learned are about disconnection as much as they are about
everything we all take for granted about the modern condition and its
comforts, conveniences and connectivity.

To end our Tyee occasional
[series](thetyee.ca/Series/2012/06/14/Off-the-Grid-In-BC/), we thought
we would share with readers 10 simple lessons.

1. An off-grid home is not a hands-off home

Our modern homes are designed to run themselves, free of our
involvement. They are also meant to shelter us from the outside and
separate us from nature, with a guarantee that power, heat and water
will flow unrestrained under all weather conditions.

Off-grid homes, instead, demand that you take care of them. They require
you to become involved in how efficiently they run. They expect you to
be aware of how they work and why they work, and sometimes why they
don't. They need you to be patient with them, to wait for resources to
become available and for technologies to be adapted to local conditions
and sudden changes.







2. Off-grid life is simple, but not uncomplicated

One of the great appeals of off-grid living is that it allows you to
practice a form of voluntary simplicity based in frugality,
sustainability, self-sufficiency and resilience. The "voluntary" part
refers to a deliberate act of choice: an awakening leading to a
lifestyle conversion. The awakening consists of gaining the critical
awareness that global society has spun out of control. Simplicity
consists of voluntary choices, such as to buy less, consume sustainably
and ethically, eat more local and natural foods, reduce clutter, recycle
and re-use, practice creativity, take a more active role in
self-education, use renewable energy resources, prefer smaller-scale
forms of living, and develop skills based on the values of
self-reliance.

Off-gridders are simplifiers. But the first thing they will teach you is
that simplicity does not mean living free of complications. Rather, it
means embracing challenges and living genuinely and free of pretensions.

3. Off-gridders are people like you and me

Most Canadians who live off-grid did not choose to move off the grid;
their local utility made the choice easy for them. It did so by making
the connection of their homes to the grid too expensive.

Rural properties far from the nearest electricity pole need to pay a lot
of money to stretch the grid all the way to their outside walls -- as
much as half a million dollars. Who would do that and then pay monthly
bills on top?

In two years we met all kinds of these people: single men, single women,
young families, retirees, professionals, farmers, artists, expats and
individuals young and old.

4. You don't need to live in the bush to live off-grid

Most off-grid homes are in rural areas, where availability of land makes
it easier to collect (and burn) wood, tap into groundwater, dispose of
waste through septic fields or composting systems and even grow food.
The old rule that you need at least 10 acres to live off-grid isn't a
bad rule at all.

But a 10-acre property isn't a cheap buy in some places, especially in
areas like the West Coast or in highly popular ex-urban areas nearby
Canada's major cities. So, for some, living off-grid in a small lot in
the middle of a city may work very well instead. The sun shines in
Calgary or Ottawa just like it does in rural Alberta or Ontario, and
firewood can be found aplenty and gratis in the discard piles of
construction sites. Besides, when you live off-grid in a city you don't
need to have a truck to drive to work or to the grocery store -- a bus
or a bike might even end up giving you the carbon footprint edge over
environmentally-sensitive but car-dependent rural off-gridders.

5. The whole of Arctic Canada is off the grid

The expression "off-grid" is typically used in the context of single
detached dwellings, but it can also be used to refer to entire
communities disconnected from a broader regional infrastructure (like
Jasper!)

Interestingly, most of Canada -- as far as size of territory goes -- is
off the grid. Arctic towns and hamlets depend on diesel imported from
the south to produce heat and power. Contained in large "tank farms"
located at the edge of town these massive holding tanks will remind you
at first sight how much a comfortable domestic life can cost.

On the other hand, the "energy tourist" might find great delight in
hiking along unusual off-grid infrastructure such as Inuvik's utilidor;
a network of pipes snaking its way above ground (rather than under) in
order to keep its neck above the permafrost.

6. Off-grid life is neither uncomfortable nor inconvenient (though it
requires serious adjustment)

Off-gridders like domestic comfort as much as you and I do.

Many people wrongly believe that off-grid homes are cold, dark, shaky
and damp. Quite the contrary. Off-grid homes are vastly more efficient
than yours or mine: better insulated, more-responsibly heated,
more-intelligently-lit, and better designed to take advantage of passive
solar energy.

Off-grid may seem inconvenient. After all, you might not be able to run
the washing machine if the sun hasn't been shining or the wind hasn't
been blowing. You might need to chop your own firewood. And you might
have to let it mellow if it's yellow.

But what's more convenient than picking food you have grown yourself,
just outside your front step? And what's more convenient than cooking it
with the free solar energy that fuels a sun oven? The truth is that a
visit to an off-grid home will force you to re-think the very meanings
of comfort and convenience.

7. Living off-grid will teach you a few skills you may have
forgotten

The corporate world is there to take care of you and me. Whenever we
need something, we can always buy it. And if we need the services of a
trades professional, we just need to Google a phone number.

Off-grid living pulls you away from a commodified world of
hyper-specialization and pushes you to become a Jack or
Jane-of-all-trades. Generating your own power forces you to learn to
understand electricity, to monitor consumption, to maintain systems.
Growing food requires you to not only understand how to plant and
harvest, but also how to preserve. Conserving energy and water teaches
you to dry clothes without a dryer or how to wash and clean more
efficiently.

And then there is building. Though, ironically, many off-gridders can be
found at Ikea looking for energy-conserving lighting solutions, most of
them build their own home or become deeply involved in their design.

8. Off-grid living isn't for everybody

Living off-grid is a lot of work. It is very difficult for two partners
who work full-time outside the home to live off-grid. Or at least it can
be very expensive to do so (as more money will need to be spent on a
bigger and more reliable system, or on professionals with the time and
skills to maintain and repair that home).

Living off-grid on one's own might also be too difficult for people who
are not physically able to take care of certain chores
(firewood-chopping easily comes to mind).

But ultimately off-grid living is not for people who expect things NOW,
who want no involvement in the way a home works, who are not ready to
adapt and make the occasional sacrifice to consumption habits, and who
are not interested in understanding basic principles of ecology or
mechanics.

With all this said, off-grid households need never sacrifice on
necessities. Of the 100 homes we visited, 98 had Internet (very few, on
the other hand, had cable or satellite television)!

9. Off-grid living means living with, not "in," a place

It rains on the West Coast. A lot. Our rain runs down hills and
mountains, making creeks and streams that can easily be turned into a
source of micro hydro-electricity. Very small, very cheap waterwheels
have a nearly insignificant impact on the local ecology and can be
assembled and maintained by most people right in their (hilly) backyard.
To boot, they produce electricity year-round.

Micro-hydro, however, is almost unheard of in the rest of Canada, where
flat land, seasonally-drying water sources or freezing weather can make
it an impractical solution to local electricity generation.

Nevertheless, the rest of Canada has a great deal of renewable resources
we West Coasters relatively lack. Solar radiation maps of the country
show that southeastern Ontario and southern Manitoba and Saskatchewan
are ideal spots for getting the best out of photovoltaic panels (cold
temperatures do not affect production). And much of the East Coast is an
ideal environment to reap the clean energy benefits of wind.

Off-grid living means living with whatever the land and sky provide,
when they provide it, and consuming less when resources are not as
available.

10. Off-grid living isn't the magic bullet solution to the world's problems

Off-grid living can teach volumes about ethical and responsible
consumption, resource conservation, sustainability, resilience and
adaptation. Yet, it is not THE answer to global energy scarcity.

It makes little sense, from a planning and engineering perspective, to
isolate ourselves into small, separate, fully-independent atom-like
homes. It makes more sense to pool and share resources whenever
possible, and to all play a fair role in doing so. Off-grid living can
then teach us about learning that role, about what it means to do our
part.

Our energy futures won't be characterized by a simple, magic solution
but rather by many diverse renewable resource technologies sensitive to
local conditions and responsive to changing needs and intelligent,
responsible demand. It is in this sense that off-grid living can be
understood: as an experiment, happening today, to solving the problems
that we will all need to face tomorrow.

**The book *Off the Grid: Re-assembling Domestic Life* includes the
stories of nearly three dozen off-grid home residents, selected from the
nearly 200 that Vannini and Taggart encountered throughout two years of
travels across Canada. It is published by Routledge.**

**Life Off Grid* is a forthcoming documentary film that explores the
lives of Canadians who've made the choice to disconnect. Stay tuned to
the film's [website](//lifeoffgrid.ca) for screening details.**


-   [Who We Are](https://www.alternet.org/staff)
-   [About](https://www.alternet.org/node/34288/)
-   [Contact Us](https://www.alternet.org/feedback)
-   [Press Information](https://www.alternet.org/press-information)
-   [Writer Guidelines](https://www.alternet.org/writer-guidelines)

-   [follow AlterNet on twitter](twitter.com/AlterNet)

Copyright 2018 AlterNet Media - PO Box 21040, Washington, DC 20009
