Class 3: Power of Commitment | Mini Class | Wim Hof Method

[](https://www.wimhofmethod.com?utm_source=miniclass&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=miniclass-to-fundamentals&utm_content=email3-v2)

CLASS 3: THE POWER OF THE MIND (commitment)
-------------------------------------------

**Warning: Always do the breathing exercise in a safe environment (e.g.
sitting on a couch/floor) and unforced. Never practice it before or
during diving, driving, swimming, taking a bath or any other
environment/place where it might be dangerous to faint. The breathing
exercise has a profound effect and should be practiced in the way it is
explained.**

**The cold is a strong force. We strongly advise you to gradually build
up your cold exposure. Always train without force and listen to your
body carefully. If not practiced responsibly, you risk hypothermia or an
'after drop'. Individuals should also not practice cold exposure when
pregnant, after drinking alcohol, after meals or during exercise. If you
have (serious) health issues, please always consult a doctor first
before practicing.**

**Available subtitles: EN, NL, DE, FR, ES and PT.**

This is the last video in the Mini Class. If you're looking to take the
next step and learn how to improve your mind-body connection, [sign up
for the Fundamentals video
course](https://www.wimhofmethod.com/fundamentals-video-course-introduction?utm_source=miniclass&utm_medium=button&utm_campaign=miniclass-to-fundamentals)
and learn to apply the Wim Hof Method to real-world scenarios,
including; decreasing stress, handling pressure situations and managing
your energy levels.

[Start the Fundamentals Video
Course](https://www.wimhofmethod.com/fundamentals-video-course-introduction?utm_source=miniclass&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=miniclass-to-fundamentals&utm_content=email3-v2)

[Hear why others love the Wim Hof
Method](https://www.wimhofmethod.com/testimonials?utm_source=miniclass&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=miniclass-to-fundamentals&utm_content=email3-v2)

If you’re curious, here’s [an animation of the “Brain over body”
study](https://youtu.be/YficBlvPwWQ) that Wim mentioned in the video.

Mini Class Video Player
-----------------------

-   [](https://explore.wimhofmethod.com/mini-class-class1-breathing-existing/)

    First Video: Breathing
    ----------------------

-   [](https://explore.wimhofmethod.com/mini-class-class2-cold-showers-existing/)

    Previous Video: Cold Therapy
    ----------------------------

-   

    Current Video: Commitment
    -------------------------

<!-- -->

-   [Terms and
    Conditions](https://explore.wimhofmethod.com/termsconditions/)
-   [Privacy Policy](https://explore.wimhofmethod.com/privacy/)

Privacy Policy Copyright 2014 - Innerfire BV | KVK: 62594044 | BTW:
NL854879742B01 | All Rights Reserved
