[Ultrarunning Magazine](https://ultrarunning.com/featured/the-long-shadow-of-depression/)

Photo: Alex Aristei
![Alex and Rob picture](https://d2goauph7ju525.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Credit-Alex-Aristei-1100-702x336.jpg)

The Long Shadow of Depression 
=============================

By Christina Bauer [03/27/2018]

After falling in love with a man who shirks labels and simply states
there is a darkness that at moments is all consuming, I have learned
more profoundly than through all my years working in mental health the
heartbreaking meaning behind this statement. Deeply touched by the world
around him, he is a sensitive and intuitive man with the heart of a
lion. It is in endurance sports and time spent in the natural world, the
moments on the brink of mind and body collapse, that the rare experience
exists when descending into the darkness he finds only light. I watch
with tears of joy, optimistic that such a moment will feed him in the
inevitable difficulties ahead. But these last few months of injury and
rehabilitation void of these bright moments have felt especially dark.

There is much written about depression and in my experience it focuses
on the person in its throes and leaves in the quiet shadows those that
love them. I could speak about my own inner struggles, but I want to
bring to the forefront the painful powerlessness of watching the shadows
descend on the love of your life. No matter what treatment is pursued,
these shadow days still come. With each passing year the weight seems
that much heavier on his shoulders, the pain more evident in his eyes
and the ache in my heart deepens as the fear sinks in – what if he
doesn’t find his way out?


This is coupled with a sweaty panic that perhaps I am somehow the cause
of the vacant look in his eyes, the consuming sadness. I come home from
a day of work to see the bedroom door closed tightly – the room dark. A
desperate yearning to be able to “make him ok” that perhaps just this
once there is some magic action – a meal, a smile, the right phrase that
can drag him out from under. Meanwhile knowing deep within it is
ridiculous, but still wondering if the relationship is a burden, and
afraid to reach out for support from my partner and find it’s not there
when I need it most. Feeling alone and afraid, closed off in a private
pain all my own, I sit in my silence. Not wanting to betray the intimate
inner world of my partner, loyalty and stigma often hamper my ability to
reach out for fear of judgment. These are the worst times, these are the
days I am married to the darkness and not the man I love.

It is especially in these moments that I ride a roller coaster of
emotion. I vacillate between believing our relationship is collapsing
and I am the cause, and blaming the disease with one broad stroke for
any difficulty and stress. It is far too easy to take all of it on, or
push it all away. There is always a third member of our relationship
lurking and intruding. I face sleepless nights of knots in my stomach
and tears that I force myself to hide away. I question everything. When
I find myself out of energy to continue steadfast in providing support,
and taking things too personally, I retreat to the mountains alone. The
peaks and valleys soothe my addled mind and absorb my tears until there
is nothing left. As the wind kisses my cheeks I feel at home and find
the perspective I crave and need to continue. I come back set into my
own skin again. These wild places hear the struggle and offer silent
solace to help me through the darkest moments over which I have no
control.

It’s incredibly important for me to find the things that keep me whole
and these moments also help me to connect with the people who support me
and understand the grip of depression. For there are no easy answers,
sometimes there are no answers at all, and these periods have been some
of the most painful of my life. It is only in the rhythm of my breathing
and my feet that I find the ability to let it go.

Luckily this is something my husband and I share, for ours is a love
born of blue skies, red rocks and deep canyons. I feel most complete
when I am spending long days in the dirt. My heart is  full when I can
glance over at the svelte frame and bushy beard of the man I love and
see reflected in his eyes a moment of peace. No words are needed and so
often it is the only thing that makes sense in a life and world full of
chaos. The wild places allow this stillness to occur within and between
us. As time has passed, balancing the commitments and obligations of
life has grown increasingly challenging and these free moments together
are fewer and farther between. The dark has seemed to settle and stay
around longer.

Somehow through a series of unlikely events we found ourselves in the
land of the midnight sun two summers in a row and our lives were filled
with light. These trips brought us together in ways not possible at home
and I have carried the images around like treasured trinkets to pull out
when like the past few months it all seemed so suffocatingly dark.

Standing atop a towering green cliff in Iceland teeming with birds
frenetically feeding their young I turn and see a set of hazel eyes
framed with the crinkle of smile lines – a shock to my heart – they had
disappeared for too long. The wind plays with his beard and he is simply
present and in awe of the majesty before us; water pouring off the
cliff, the vast ocean below and rising behind us a green misty mountain
pass. Possibility floods back into the eyes of the man I love and we
silently renew bonds inside ourselves and our commitment to wild places
as a vital and living part of our existence together.

Fast forward a year to when our plane touches down in the Lofoten
Islands of Norway. I see the same sparkle in his eyes. Craggy peaks butt
up against a turquoise sea. We become immersed in this place. The
experience is magnified by the people we meet that are deeply invested
in preserving both the beauty and the culture of this magical land. We
participate in a race and both smile as we tumble over late season snow,
eat until we are stuffed to the gills and wander rows of drying fish and
brightly colored huts. We settle into an easy rhythm and leave with a
fresh hunger to return and explore.

These trips signify for us a commitment to leave behind the darkest
moments and strive to live in the glow of possibility – to be outside
together for the pure joy of discovering what is around the next bend.
They inspire us to cultivate experiences that allow the light to flood
in. This relationship with the land around us is vital. It helps us to
reconnect, and even for a brief moment forget the darkness. The new
bonds we form allow us to persevere standing side by side facing the
demons with our faces raised to the sun. I have been drawing on this
energy as we have faced a string of the bleakest months of our
partnership, and found the light streaming out of the smallest moments,
like the first running steps on a treadmill.

We are constantly reminded of how important it is to share this love of
open spaces. I hope everyone has an opportunity to adventure with the
ones they love, most especially when there are so many reasons not to.
Whether out the back door or on the other side of the globe, time
outside together is unmatched. It has had an extraordinary impact on our
lives. The different paces, priorities, likes and dislikes don’t matter
in the end. I know that whatever the future brings these are moments I
will treasure for the rest of my days.

*Christina Bauer is a self-described desert and mountain maven. She
loves exploring new trails around the world, but most often you can find
her running the Flagstaff trails or exploring new corners of the
Colorado Plateau with her partner Rob Krar.*

### 15 Comments {#comments .section-head}

1.  <div id="li-comment-6814">

    [Nico B]{.comment-author} on [03/28/2018 6:17

    Powerful writing, Christina. Thank you.


2.  <div id="li-comment-6815">

    [BJW]{.comment-author} on [03/28/2018 8:10

    Thanks i needed to read that. It is so terribly difficult to support
    the ones you love when the dark days are around. We used to run
    together and experienced those same moments, and the she stopped
    that too. My love and prayers to you both.


3.  <div id="li-comment-6816">

    [[Saulius
    on [03/28/2018 10:22



    Thank you for sharing your personal experience with us. It is
    because of individuals like yourselves that I found the courage to
    begin sharing my own personal stuggles publicly. I hope in doing so
    I can help another in need and educate those who don’t suffer or
    have firsthand experience with depression. I’ve found this to be
    healing and beneficial to me and I hope your sharing helps the two
    of you as well. May you have many more shared days on the trails
    together.





4.  <div id="li-comment-6822">





    [Anonymous]{.comment-author} on [03/29/2018 9:35



    Beautifully written piece! Thank you for opening up and sharing.
    This spoke to me on so many levels after a long-term relationship
    with someone who struggled with anxiety and the feeling of trying to
    help but having nearly no impact. I also began to routinely question
    my worth in the relationship.





5.  <div id="li-comment-6824">





    [Samantha de la Vega]{.comment-author} on [03/29/2018 10:14



    Thank you so much for your courage to share this openly. This is
    REAL for so many people, and it’s heartening to see your trust in
    the process of communication. After all, it is in our humanity and
    our shared experience that we truly live.





6.  <div id="li-comment-6825">





    [PAULA ADAMS]{.comment-author} on [03/29/2018 10:43



    Christina, you are not alone. Big hugs and prayers for healing.





7.  <div id="li-comment-6826">





    [Gavin]{.comment-author} on [03/29/2018 11:13



    Hi\
    A great read… I feel like I’m a bit like your partner. The heavy
    cloak that is often worn by both, so dark and heavy.





8.  <div id="li-comment-6828">





    [Brian]{.comment-author} on [03/29/2018 12:32



    Thank you. You paint an amazing and honest picture. My wife and I
    just planned a spur of the moment weekend getaway to the mountains.
    It has been too long.





9.  <div id="li-comment-6829">





    [Terri Rylander]{.comment-author} on [03/29/2018 12:56



    So beautifully stated and nice view into the other side, not often
    spoken of. Thanks Christina for sharing this part of your life.





10. <div id="li-comment-6830">





    [Kelly Tabara]{.comment-author} on [03/29/2018 1:14



    Keep talking, sharing, writing. You are not alone. People (me)
    understand that darkness and care.





11. <div id="li-comment-6838">





    [Jonathon]{.comment-author} on [03/29/2018 10:02



    Your story resonates so deeply with me. Endurance running helped me
    to move from a place of feeling a victim to feeling more empowered.
    Being in touch with nature is a hugely important aspect of wellness.
    Thank you for sharing your story.





12. <div id="li-comment-6839">





    [José Vicente]{.comment-author} on [03/29/2018 10:16



    Huge hug for you both..I remembered Rob running trough the volcanic
    landscape of Transvulcania. And I was wondering how it would be have
    so much attention..no I wonder how it will be with almost no
    attention but your own thoughts..let there be the sparkle in his
    eyes and the love for you to see the man he is. Knowing that with
    time the healing starts. Like drops of water will fill the bucket
    small moments will fill your heart. Rob “find the drops” and with
    that said I send you both a warm hug.





13. <div id="li-comment-6864">





    [Laramie]{.comment-author} on [03/31/2018 12:40



    Beautiful article. Depression is a terrible disease with many
    vicitims.\
    We share a love of wild places that along with faith fuels our
    ability to cope.\
    Thanks so much for such a courageous piece of writing.





14. <div id="li-comment-6910">





    [[Christian H](http://irunanonymous.com){.url}]{.comment-author} on
    [04/04/2018 7:03



    This is very difficult for the both of you I am sure. Have you ever
    considered attending an Al-Anon meeting for your own well-being?
    Although the disease is not alcoholism, it sounds like you are
    suffering from a disease that has many commonalities and Al-Anon may
    be able offer some suggested Steps and actions that could the both
    of you. Best of luck and God bless





15. <div id="li-comment-8461">

    [Melissa]{.comment-author} on [06/07/2018 7:34

    This is a beautifully written piece with raw truth and hope
    expressed throughout. Thank you for writing. It gives me hope.

