Rory Bosio Doesn't Really Train 
===============================

[May 21, 2015](https://www.outsideonline.com/1983246/meet-ultrarunnings-most-hardcore-free-spirit)

In the grueling world of ultrarunning, she's an anomaly: a low-key athlete who thrives on unstructured training, competes by instinct, and crushes men in the sport's most prestigious race {#in-the-grueling-world-of-ultrarunning-shes-an-anomaly-a-low-key-athlete-who-thrives-on-unstructured-training-competes-by-instinct-and-crushes-men-in-the-sports-most-prestigious-race .article__subtitle .subtitle}
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="article__hero rel enlarge js-open-modal"
data-modal-img-src="https://www.outsideonline.com/sites/default/files/styles/img_1400x800/public/2015/05/21/rory-bosio-donner-pass_h.jpg?itok=894KuP0z">

[Riding Alejandro, her beach cruiser, up Donner
Pass.]{.article__caption} [(Ian Allen)]{.article__credit}

![](https://www.outsideonline.com/sites/default/files/styles/img_600x600-low-quality/public/2015/05/21/rory-bosio-donner-pass_s.jpg?itok=09a5VKN_){.lazy}

[[Nick Heil]{.is-vishidden}](/1746741/nick-heil){.author-link
.link--black .lazy}

[[[Nick Heil]{itemprop="name"}]{itemprop="author"
itemtype="https://schema.org/Person"}](/1746741/nick-heil){.link--black}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When Rory Bosio, a 29-year-old pediatric intensive-care nurse from
Truckee, California, lined up at the start of Chamonix's[Ultra-Trail du
Mont-Blanc](http://ultratrailmontblanc.com/) in August 2013, she didn't
expect to win. 

She had finished fourth in the women’s division the year before, on a
snow-shortened 62-mile course. She had never won a major race, and to
the small but tough field of women starting in 2013—like Catalonians
[Núria Picas](http://nuriapicas.com/home/) and [Emma
Roca](http://www.emmaroca.com/), top finishers in the [Skyrunner World
Series](http://www.skyrunning.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=336&Itemid=168)
and the [Marathon des Sables](http://www.marathondessables.co.uk/),
respectively—Bosio was all but unknown.

No ultramarathon is easy, but among the growing inventory of 100-milers,
the UTMB is particularly fierce. A 104-mile loop that circumnavigates
the 15,771-foot Mont Blanc massif, passing through France, Italy, and
Switzerland, the route requires ten climbs that total some 31,500
vertical feet. The weather can be so bad, the course is sometimes
rerouted or truncated at the last minute. Top times are just over 20
hours, but around half of the 2,300 racers don’t finish at all. Hal
Koerner, winner of both the Hardrock 100 and the Western States 100,
arguably the two most challenging ultras on U.S. soil, has completed the
UTMB only once in three attempts. The year he did finish, 2011, it took
him 40 hours and required him to wrap a ziplock bag around his testicles
to guard against chafing.

<div class="has-fade" data-animation="">

[]{.has-pullquote .pullquote-fill
data-pullquote="“I put in a lot of volume but not much intensity,” Bosio says. “Sometimes I see what other people are doing and it seems”—her brow furrows—“excessive.”"}

</div>

The lead pack at the 2013 UTMB took off at blistering, road-marathon
speeds. At mile 20, Bosio was in about 100th place, but by the midway
point she had reeled in all the women and most of the men. On the final
climb, a 2,000-foot grind over the Col des Montets, the pace was taking
its toll. “It’s the most painful part of the race,” Bosio says. “It felt
like a thousand tiny knives were stabbing into my quads.”

At last she came striding through Chamonix, wearing a mud-stained shirt
and the North Face’s Eat My Dust running skirt, the streets bracketed
with a cheering crowd, like a stage finish at the Tour de France. She
[crossed the line in
22:37](http://www.tahoedailytribune.com/northshore/nobituaries/8008190-113/bosio-blanc-france-mile),
demolishing the women’s record of 24:56, set in 2009 by American [Krissy
Moehl](http://krissymoehl.com/). Picas, who would finish second, was
nearly two hours back. What’s more, Bosio had come in seventh overall,
shaking up the UTMB boys club by becoming the first woman to crack the
top ten. 

She was quickly beset by reporters: What had she done to prepare? What
was the race like? How had she pulled this off? Literally overnight, the
American underdog had run her way to international stardom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

To understand the free-spirited enigma that is Rory Bosio, you must
first catch up with her, which is no small feat on the trail—or off.
Attempt number one: “I’d love to talk, but it’s Samoan Night. I’m
breaking out the grass skirt and ukulele! Can I call you tomorrow?”
Attempt number two: “Apologies for not responding sooner. Was playing an
endless game of laser tag. I can talk tomorrow between 2-4!” Attempt
number three: “*Sacre bleu*! Sorry for missing the call… got roped into
an all-day family hike. I’m around tomorrow. Promises, promises!”

“I don’t really train,” Bosio tells me with a laugh when I finally meet
up with her at her creekside home in Truckee. “I put in a lot of volume
but not much intensity. Sometimes I see what other people are doing and
it seems”—her brow furrows—“excessive.” 

Despite “not training,” Bosio, now 30, has owned nearly everything she’s
entered since 2013’s UTMB. In May 2014, she won the [North Face
Endurance Challenge New
York](https://www.thenorthface.com/get-outdoors/endurance-challenge/new-york.html),
a competitive 50-miler. That June, she won the [North Face Lavaredo
Ultra Trail](http://www.ultratrail.it/en/), a 118-kilometer race in the
Italian Dolomites, setting a new course record. And last August, she
[defended her women’s title at
UTMB](http://www.outsideonline.com/1805181/american-wins-utmb-100-again?utm_source=facebook&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=facebookpost),
dispelling any mutterings that her first win had been a fluke, finishing
in 23:23.

The question, of course, is: what mysterious alchemy of genetics and
conditioning has given rise to such domination by a woman who paints
polka dots on her shoes?

![rory-bosio-portrait-silly.jpg](https://www.outsideonline.com/sites/default/files/styles/img_600x400-low-quality/public/2015/05/21/rory-bosio-portrait-silly.jpg?itok=_ekw5AIc){.lazy}
[Bosio in Truckee, California, in March.]{.article__caption} (Ian Allen)
Bosio (pronounced “*bo*-zee-oh”) is five foot eight, cheery, and very
pretty, with broad shoulders and startlingly long legs that eat up
mountain trails, one of her biomechanical advantages. She grew up in
nearby Tahoe City and spent much of her youth hiking and peak bagging
with family and friends around the Sierra Nevada. Bosio discovered that
she had a pretty good motor, routinely outpacing the adults. In the
winter, she cross-country and downhill skied (Julia Mancuso was one of
her closest childhood friends), and during high school she focused her
athletic energy on nordic racing.

In 2007, just out of college at the University of California at Davis,
she ran her first ultra—the [Silver State
50/50](http://www.silverstatestriders.com/fiftyfifty/), in Reno,
Nevada—and killed it, winning the women’s division and placing fourth
overall. In 2010, she entered her first 100-miler, [Western
States](http://www.wser.org/), a point-to-point course that starts in
Squaw Valley and ends in Auburn, California. Bosio finished fourth. She
was promptly recruited to the North Face’s national ultrarunning team
(no salary, just swag and travel expenses for races) and ramped up her
training in 2011. 

That’s when Bosio, who tends to downplay her competitiveness and
accomplishments, pushed herself to the breaking point. She had been
working with a Zimbabwean coach who steadily increased the volume and
intensity of her workouts. He told her she might have a shot at being a
competitive marathoner, where the real money and fame could be found. 

She had also started her nursing career, working rigorous shifts,
occasionally overnight. She found herself getting winded just from
walking up stairs. A blood test revealed that she had anemia, with
critically low iron levels. Her doctor recommended a blood transfusion.

“I think that first Western States really took a lot out of me,” Bosio
says. “I wasn’t paying enough attention to recovery or nutrition back
then.”

Bosio retooled her diet, incorporating more iron-rich lean meats and
seafood like mussels. She also reached out to Tav Streit, a longtime
family friend and endurance athlete. Streit is a sports-performance
coach and a licensed physical therapist. He had coached Bosio as a
junior nordic skier, and their families vacationed together in Yosemite
most summers. 

“I gave her a 25 percent chance of racing Western that year,” Streit
says. “She could barely walk. What she was doing clearly wasn’t working.
We needed to go back to the drawing board.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ultrarunning has a notoriously high burnout rate. The volume of racing
and training—in some cases 200 miles per week—can be debilitating,
sometimes career ending, even to the most dedicated competitors. 

“You see something happen after about three years,” says [Jenn
Shelton](http://www.outsideonline.com/1859316/ultramarathon-runner-jenn-shelton),
a former American record holder in the 100-mile. “Top runners start to
fade away or drop out altogether. That’s about how long it takes for the
sport to catch up to you.”

New Zealander [Anna Frost](https://frostysfootsteps.wordpress.com/), the
2012 World Skyrunner Series champion, disappeared from ultrarunning for
nearly a year in 2013 due to injuries and depression. In 2008, Kyle
Skaggs, a runner from New Mexico, shattered the course record by two
hours at the Hardrock 100. Shortly after, he quit racing.

But Bosio’s troubles may have had some unexpected benefits. 

“I had her stop running entirely,” Streit tells me. “We nordic-skied and
hiked and talked a lot about the reasons she was running and racing.
Rory does really well when she’s psyched on life, so we focused on that.
We’d say, What do you need out of today? Let’s turn it into a grand
adventure where you’re in the backcountry doing what you love.”

“That was a real turning point for me,” Bosio says. “Training felt less
like a chore. It got fun again.”

![rory-bosio-portrait-mountains.jpg](https://www.outsideonline.com/sites/default/files/styles/img_600x400-low-quality/public/2015/05/21/rory-bosio-portrait-mountains.jpg?itok=hFhaU_YE){.lazy}
["I put in a lot of volume but not much intensity."]{.article__caption}
(Ian Allen)
After a couple of months, Streit helped Bosio with her technique to
optimize efficiency over the long haul. 

“We shortened her stride quite a bit,” Streit says. He also had her slow
down on the uphills, where Bosio’s tendency was to push. At times,
Streit waxed Obi-Wan: Focus on what you love about running, the freedom
and the ease of it. 

The key, Streit insisted, was to find—and remain in—that flow state
where you can move along with minimal effort. It’s the holy grail of
ultrarunning. “Rory stays in that zone longer than anyone else,” he
says. “That’s more important than any exercise prescription.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bosio has continued to work with Streit periodically, refining an
unorthodox system of racing and training. Because gels, bars, and drink
mixes commonly upset her stomach, for example, she invented her own
whole-food fueling system. One trail favorite: boiled sweet potatoes
mashed with avocado, coconut oil, salt, and other seasonings. “I found
these little single-serving pouches online, and I stuff them in my
sports bra,” she says.

By the time I catch up with her in Truckee, her workouts have evolved
into an enviable buffet of skiing, hiking, yoga, paddleboarding,
hula-hooping, dance parties, rides on her beach cruiser, Alejandro, and
long walks with her Australian shepherd, Louis. Runs include
high-country epics in the Sierra Nevada, without a watch or a training
partner, cranking “anything pop” or podcasts like Answer Me This!

“Rory does so well because she’s having a blast out there,” says Hal
Koerner. “You see her in races and she’s loving it.”

She spent the six weeks leading up to the 2013 UTMB living in Chamonix,
exploring the course, ambling into the Haute-Savoie, stopping at alpine
refugios for a cappuccino or a brat and a beer. By the time the race
came around, she was fired up and in the zone. 

![rory-bosio-chamonix-tnf.jpg](https://www.outsideonline.com/sites/default/files/styles/img_600x400-low-quality/public/2015/05/21/rory-bosio-chamonix-tnf.jpg?itok=WtCY4JOv){.lazy}
[Bosio in Chamonix.]{.article__caption} (Tim Kemple/Courtesy of The
North)
On race day, Bosio hones her focus through a ritualized warm-up that
includes applying glitter to her arms, listening to music on her iPod,
and performing a series of dynamic exercises like lunges and push-ups.
Then, she says, “I have a solo dance party. My style is reminiscent of
Elaine from *Seinfeld*, but more frenetic.” Lastly, she does “a minute
or two of calm, deep breathing.”

“When she gets to the start line, she wants to win,” says runner [Mike
Foote](http://www.outsideonline.com/1925496/ultrarunnings-humble-champion).
“Don’t let her tell you otherwise.”

Bosio says she may have one other edge on her competition, courtesy of
the night shifts in pediatric intensive care that keep her on her feet
until morning. Her work also provides perspective. “Running’s pretty
selfish,” she says. “Spend enough time with these kids and you see what
really matters.”

While there isn’t much money to be earned winning ultras—race purses are
often gear gift certificates—Bosio became a North Face global-team
athlete in 2014, which pays enough that she was able to go per diem at
the hospital. But it’s not enough to quit her job, even if she wanted
to. “I’m conflicted about being a professional runner,” she tells me as
we bike around Donner Lake. “I like having a flexible nursing schedule
and traveling, but I don’t think I could run full-time. It wouldn’t be
good for my mental health.”

Bosio’s 2015 plans are still solidifying, though one thing is certain:
she won’t be returning to Chamonix this year. She wants new adventures,
she says, and she’s bothered by the fact that UTMB has podium places for
ten men but only five women. “When that levels out, I might return.” 

Currently, when she’s not out “re-creating the 1960s Olympic downhill at
Squaw Valley using saucer sleds,” she has signed on to cohost
[*Boundless*](http://tv.esquire.com/shows/boundless), a television show
for the Esquire Network about the world’s toughest endurance races. And
she’s considering entering [La Diagonale des
Fous](http://www.grandraid-reunion.com/?lang=en) (the Madmen’s
Diagonal), a 100-miler with 29,500 feet of climbing held each October on
Réunion Island, between Madagascar and Mauritius, that attracts more
than 2,000 racers despite its remoteness.

She’d also really like a shot at the [Hardrock
100](http://hardrock100.com/); its long climbs over the San Juan
Mountains in southern Colorado are the kind of terrain Bosio loves and
dominates. “I could be pretty happy just doing a couple of races each
year, and I think that one would suit me well,” says Bosio.

Her fellow runners are less understated. “Hardrock’s tough to get into,
since they cap it at 152,” says Foote of the race’s lottery draw. “But
if she gets in, look out. She will crush.”\
    \
*Nick Heil wrote about the Weather Channel's Jim Cantore in June 2013.*

<div class="spacing">

<div class="affiliate-link-disclaimer article-origin">

</div>

<div class="article-origin">

From [Outside Magazine, June
2015](/1973176/outside-magazine-june-2015){.issue}

</div>

<div class="article-origin article-origin--taxonomy">

[Filed To:]{.article-origin__heading .dib .heading__five .black}
[Athletes](/category/athletes) [/]{.divider}
[Ultrarunning](/category/ultrarunning) [/]{.divider} [Trail
Running](/category/trail-running) [/]{.divider}
[Fitness](/category/fitness) [/]{.divider}
[Nutrition](/category/nutrition) [/]{.divider} [Endurance
Training](/category/endurance-training) [/]{.divider}
[Events](/category/events) [/]{.divider} [Outside
Features](/category/features)

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="section recirc bg--yellow spacing">

<div class="recirc__inner spacing--half"
data-bundles="[{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;The Foods You Should Be Eating at Every Age&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2318741\/what-to-eat-every-age&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/14\/diet-performance-age-performance-plate_s.jpg?itok=t-6cTZOM&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2318741&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Carly Graf&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;This Ultrarunner Wins by Stressing Less &quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2322881\/ultrarunner-courtney-dauwalter-training-western-states&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/28\/courtney-dauwalter-ultrarunner-western-states_s.jpg?itok=EN-bh3H8&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2322881&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Ariella Gintzler&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;Running Up Mountains at Age 97&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2321616\/running-highest-peak-east-97&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/22\/fortheloveofmary_vth_s.jpg?itok=HhIyMaON&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2321616&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;video&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:true,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;Why Wilder Nature Is Better for Your Health&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2321091\/wilderness-nature-outdoors-good-your-health&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/26\/nature-levels-sweat-science_s.jpg?itok=Z8-Lcyql&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2321091&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Alex Hutchinson&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;Your Fastest Years Are Ahead of You&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2322471\/how-set-running-goals-you-age&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/27\/set-running-goals-as-you-age_s.jpg?itok=_AjxseNo&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2322471&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Martin Fritz Huber&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;She Got Injured at the Olympics. Here's How She Mastered Recovery.&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2321416\/how-abbey-dagostino-recovered-injury-olympics&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/21\/abbey-dagostino-portrait_s.jpg?itok=z1XPLmdm&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2321416&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Molly Mirhashem&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;Jim Walmsley and All the Coconino Cowboys Are Running Western States&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2321511\/lighting-fire-pact-was-made&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/21\/apactwasmade_vth_s.jpg?itok=N9X3831e&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2321511&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;video&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:true,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;Stock Up on This Powerhouse Summer Produce&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2319276\/the-best-summer-foods-for-athletes&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/18\/hand-watermelon-ocean_s.jpg?itok=QJXZXLZi&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2319276&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Sara Angle&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;Running Is Hard. These Socks Make it Easier.&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2319496\/best-socks-running-tested&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/21\/karl-meltzer-ultrarunner-sky-mountains_s.jpg?itok=BOAGdHXa&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2319496&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Julie Brown&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;How to Run Your First Marathon After 50 &quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2319466\/how-run-your-first-marathon-after-50&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/18\/marathon_50_s.jpg?itok=zW_-bK4R&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2319466&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Carly Graf&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;Inside the 340-Mile Relay From Santa Monica to Las Vegas&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2320831\/the-speed-project-relay-las-vegas-santa-monica&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/20\/the-speed-project-runner-desert_s.jpg?itok=LSiO6NEB&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2320831&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Martin Fritz Huber&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;Running Was Her Life. Then She Suffered A Terrible Injury.&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2318256\/how-ultrarunner-hillary-allen-overcame-injury&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/21\/hillary-allen-laughing-portrait_s.jpg?itok=ZY4Z2rrF&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2318256&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Rhiannon Russell&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;Altitude Will F&amp;*K You Up\u2014Unless You Follow These 3 Steps&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2311731\/how-train-altitude&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/05\/29\/train-for-high-altitude_s.jpg?itok=cs3vomSS&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2311731&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Abigail Barronian&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;You\u2019re Faster with Friends, Even Uphill&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2320396\/youre-faster-friends-even-uphill&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/20\/mountain-bikers-riding-up-hill_s.jpg?itok=qoySdrcN&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2320396&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Alex Hutchinson&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;Pea Protein Is the Best Protein&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2318841\/should-you-get-protein-from-peas&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/14\/peas-protein-performance-plate_s.jpg?itok=8WlbxNja&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2318841&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Sara Angle&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;5 Moves for Stronger Glutes&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2317726\/5-glutes-exercises-best&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/13\/woman-squats-gym-weights_s.jpg?itok=13so9Z0r&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2317726&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Sara Angle&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;Putting Napping to the Test&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2319436\/putting-napping-test&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/18\/napping-sweat-science_s.jpg?itok=2HnppOVR&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2319436&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Alex Hutchinson&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;Ultrarunner Rory Bosio on Why She Runs&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2318171\/ultrarunner-rory-bosio-why-she-runs&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/12\/rorybosio_vth_s.jpg?itok=zoX-Wx5Z&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2318171&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;video&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:true,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;The Art of Pacing Is More Complicated Than You Think&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2318116\/art-pacing-more-complicated-you-think&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/14\/molly-ludlow-pacing-800_s.jpg?itok=pVC_AlQ3&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2318116&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Alex Hutchinson&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;},{&quot;title&quot;:&quot;The Best Recovery Tools for Climbers&quot;,&quot;link&quot;:&quot;\/2316706\/the-best-recovery-tools-for-climbers&quot;,&quot;img&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/www.outsideonline.com\/sites\/default\/files\/styles\/img_200x200\/public\/2018\/06\/06\/climber-recovery-tools-expert-essentials_s.jpg?itok=_t7BwwAv&quot;,&quot;nid&quot;:&quot;2316706&quot;,&quot;type&quot;:&quot;article&quot;,&quot;byline&quot;:&quot;Julie Brown&quot;,&quot;is_video&quot;:false,&quot;is_sponsored&quot;:&quot;&quot;}]"
data-override-bundles="" data-title="Stay on Topic" data-nid="">

</div>

[More Fitness](/fitness){.recirc__btn .btn .btn--l}

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div
class="article-share share-toolbox article-social--bottom article-social--right">

<div class="share-toolbox__inner spacing--quarter">

<div class="share-buttons">

[](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https%3A//www.outsideonline.com/1983246/meet-ultrarunnings-most-hardcore-free-spirit%3Futm_medium%3Dsocial%26utm_source%3Dfacebook%26utm_campaign%3Donsiteshare){.share-button__link
.share-button__link--facebook}
<div class="share-button share-button--small">

<div class="share-button__icon path-fill--white" aria-hidden="true">

</div>

[Share]{.share-button__title}

</div>

[](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Rory%20Bosio%20Doesn%27t%20Really%20Train%20@outsidemagazine&url=https%3A//www.outsideonline.com/1983246/meet-ultrarunnings-most-hardcore-free-spirit%3Futm_medium%3Dsocial%26utm_source%3Dtwitter%26utm_campaign%3Donsiteshare){.share-button__link
.share-button__link--twitter}
<div class="share-button share-button--small">

<div class="share-button__icon path-fill--white" aria-hidden="true">

</div>

[Tweet]{.share-button__title}

</div>

[]{.share-button__link .share-button__link--sms}
<div class="share-button share-button--small">

<div class="share-button__icon path-fill--white" aria-hidden="true">

</div>

[Text]{.share-button__title}

</div>

[](mailto:?subject=Rory%20Bosio%20Doesn%27t%20Really%20Train&body=https%3A//www.outsideonline.com/1983246/meet-ultrarunnings-most-hardcore-free-spirit%3Futm_medium%3Dsocial%26utm_source%3Demail%26utm_campaign%3Donsiteshare){.share-button__link
.share-button__link--email}
<div class="share-button share-button--small">

<div class="share-button__icon path-fill--white" aria-hidden="true">

</div>

[Email]{.share-button__title}

</div>

</div>

</div>

[]{.share-toggle .js-toggle-parent}

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="footer__graphic">

</div>

<div class="footer__wrap">

<div class="footer__inner">

[![Outside
Online](/sites/all/themes/outside/images/outside-o.svg)](/){.footer__logo
.no-hover}
<div class="footer__mission">

#### **Our Mission** {#our-mission .footer__mission-heading}

To inspire active participation in the world outside through
award-winning coverage of the sports, people, places, adventure,
discoveries, health and fitness, gear and apparel, trends and events
that make up an active lifestyle.

</div>

<div class="footer__social">

Facebook Icon
Twitter Icon
Flipboard Icon
Instagram Icon
Pinterest Icon

</div>

-   [Contact Us](/contact-us){.footer__nav-link}
-   [Terms of
    Use](/1929046/outside-terms-use-and-end-user-license-agreement){.footer__nav-link}
-   [Privacy](/1929051/mariah-media-network-llcs-privacy-policy){.footer__nav-link}
-   [Ads](/1929491/about-our-ads){.footer__nav-link}
-   [Media Kit](http://www.outsidemediakit.com/){.footer__nav-link}
-   [Subscriptions](/2302856/subscribe-now-outside-magazine){.footer__nav-link}
-   [Affiliate
    Links](/2171581/outside-onlines-policy-affiliate-links){.footer__nav-link}
-   [RSS](/1824056/outsides-rss-feeds){.footer__nav-link}
-   [Site Feedback](/2271831/give-us-your-feedback){.footer__nav-link}

<div class="copyright">

© 2018 Mariah Media Network LLC.

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

Pinterest Icon
