The Right Music Can Help You Recover From a Tough Workout

New research shows how to build the ideal post-run playlist. (And yes, we built you one!) {#new-research-shows-how-to-build-the-ideal-post-run-playlist.-and-yes-we-built-you-one .field-dek}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[By ]{.byline-role}[[Scott
Douglas](/person/scott-douglas)]{.field-author} ]{.byline-wrapper}
[[Friday, December 8, 2017, 10:16 am]{property="dc:date dc:created"
content="2017-12-08T09:28:21-05:00" datatype="xsd:dateTime"}]{.date}

If you’re among the [millions of people who listen to
music](http://cdn.trustedpartner.com/docs/library/RunningUSA2012/RunningUSA_NRS_2016_RUSA_F.pdf)
while running, you probably put a lot of thought into your on-the-go
playlist. And for good reason: Research backs your intuition that [the
right music](http://www.runnersworld.com/music) can help a given pace
feel easier, get you to stay out another mile or two, or just [make your
run more
enjoyable](http://thesportjournal.org/article/music-sport-and-exercise-update-research-and-application/).

But what about after your run? According to [a new study out of Brunel
University in
London](http://journals.lww.com/acsm-msse/Abstract/publishahead/Psychological_and_Psychophysiological_Effects_of.97053.aspx),
listening to the right kind of music post-workout can help you get the
most out of the run you just did. In particular, 20 to 30 minutes of
slow, sedate music after your run can produce bodily changes that mean
you should [recover](http://www.runnersworld.com/recovery) more quickly.
That same music can help you remember your run more fondly, meaning that
you’ll be more likely to want to repeat the experience.

For the study, 42 university students (21 women, 21 men) did a cycling
workout to exhaustion on three occasions. They concluded the workout
with a brief cool-down of easy spinning (what the researchers called
“active recovery”) and then sat in a comfortable chair for 30 minutes
(“passive recovery”). The difference among the three workouts was that
each student either listened to short, fast songs (around 130 beats per
minute), longer, slower songs (around 70 beats per minute), or no music
at all during the half-hour of passive recovery. The researchers
measured the students' levels of cortisol, a hormone that’s released in
response to stress, as well as their overall emotional states.

The key findings: The students’ cortisol levels increased the most
during active recovery when they listened to the fast music. Their
cortisol levels returned to normal most quickly when they listened to
the slow music. Both are desirable outcomes in terms of recovery. In the
short term, higher cortisol levels during the easy effort of a cool down
get glucose to your [brain](http://wwww.runnersworld.com/brain) and
increase anti-inflammatory activity in your muscles, speeding repair.

But you don’t want your cortisol levels to stay elevated for too long
after a workout, because your body suffers when it sustains
fight-or-flight mode. (If you’ve ever felt wired but tired a couple
hours after a race or hard workout, you know this sensation.) Instead,
what you want once you’re done cooling down is for your body’s
stress-management systems to return to normal as soon as possible, so
that true recovery can take place. That’s why elite runners are
fastidious about post-workout
[nutrition](http://www.runnersworld.com/nutrition),
[stretching](http://www.runnersworld.com/stretching), and the like.
According to this new research, listening to slow, sedative music in the
half-hour after your cooldown should also hasten recovery, because the
music appears to lower your cortisol levels sooner than would otherwise
be the case.

<div id="in_content_nativo_desktop">

 

</div>

<div class="zeus_inhouse_ad_container desktop">

</div>

<div class="zeus-teads-container mobile">

</div>

<div class="playlist">

<div class="myplayer">

<div class="playlist-wrapper">

</div>

</div>

</div>

Supporting this thinking is the study’s finding that the students
reported feeling calmer and less aroused when they listened to the slow
music. That is, their more relaxed emotional state matched the lower
cortisol levels that accompanied the sedate music.

Given the findings of this and other studies he’s done, [Costas
Karageorghis](http://www.brunel.ac.uk/people/costas-karageorghis/research),
Ph.D., suggests a post-workout playlist that starts with medium-tempo
music (115 to 90 beats per minute) for your cooldown and switches to
slower music for the next block of time, when you might be stretching,
driving, or otherwise transitioning from hard-working runner to going
about your day. Karageorghis, who is probably the world’s leading
researcher on the intersection of music and exercise, says you’ll get
the most benefit if you stick with the slower songs for a while. “The
most pronounced differences between slow, sedative music and fast,
stimulative music conditions were evident in the latter stages of
passive recovery, after 15 minutes,” he says.

Our digital editorial assistant, Ally Spiroff, built the playlist below
on the basis of Karageorghis’s recommendations.

If you want to create your own, Karageorghis advises these general
parameters for the relaxing, passive-recovery section:

-   The music should be neutral or relaxing in nature.
-   The music should use what Karageorghis calls “soothing, warm
    instruments, such as strings, oboe, muted trumpet or gentle piano.”
-   Consider including nature sounds, as you might find on music
    designed for meditation.
-   Consider finding longer songs, of 10 minutes or more, to lessen the
    jarring of transition between tracks.
-   Avoid rhythmically complex music, such as hip-hop.

If you’re up on your musical theory, Karageorghis has even more specific
advice.

<div id="in_content_nativo_mobile">

 

</div>

<div class="zeus_inhouse_ad_container mobile">

</div>

“The music should be characterized by regular pulsation and repetitive
tonal patterns based on a limited number of pitch levels,” he says.
“Good examples of recuperative music include the slow-tempo classical
works of Vivaldi, Handel, and Bach. For a more contemporary sound, I
would recommend the music of artists such as Enya or Enigma. On Spotify,
the easiest thing to do is pick a single ‘archetypal’ recuperative
track, such as ‘You’re Beautiful’ by James Blunt, and the algorithm will
do the rest.”

**RELATED:** Take the dread out of the mill with these [on-demand
treadmill workouts for
runners](http://offers.rodale.com/offer/601652?keycode=261786).

Remember that this study involved people cycling to exhaustion. The most
similar types of runs are races, interval workouts, and tempo runs.
Think about using this music-manipulation idea for any workout you do
that involves a warm-up and cooldown, as well as after long runs. Of
course, if you have time after normal workaday runs to listen to half an
hour of calming music, your cortisol levels will thank you.

©2018 Hearst Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
