2018-05-24

# When the Best Therapy Is Right at Your Feet

![\#](https://www.runnersworld.com/sites/runnersworld.com/files/depression-hero.jpg)

Photo by Stacey Cramp

The author gets in his daily therapy while vacationing in California.

Running puts everyone in a better mood. But for some of us, our miles are key to managing depression and anxiety.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### By Scott Douglas

![dropcap](https://www.runnersworld.com/sites/runnersworld.com/files/dropcaps/dropcaps/m.svg){#first}[ost
Tuesdays, I run early]{.leadin} in the morning with a woman named
Meredith. For such close friends, we’re quite different. Meredith is a
voluble social worker who draws energy from crowds. I’m an introverted
editor who works from home. Meredith runs her best in large races and
loves training with big groups. I’ve set PRs in solo time trials and
tend to bail when a run’s head count gets above five. Meredith is a
worrier, beset by regrets and anticipated outcomes, who has sought
treatment for anxiety. I have dysthymia, or chronic low-grade
depression. We like to joke that Meredith stays up late as a way of
avoiding the next day, whereas I go to bed early to speed the arrival of
a better tomorrow.

We do have one key thing in common: Meredith and I run primarily to
bolster our mental health. Like all runners, we relish the short-term
experience of finishing our run feeling like we’ve hit reset and can
better handle the rest of the day. What’s not universal is our
recognition that, without regular running, the underlying fabric of our
lives—our friendships, our marriages, our careers, our odds of being
something other than miserable most of the time—will fray. For those of
us with depression or anxiety, we need running like a diabetic needs
insulin.

Meredith and I discovered this decades ago, and now researchers and
practitioners are starting to catch up. Studies show that [aerobic
exercise can be as effective as
anti-depressants](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1468-2850.2006.00021.x/epdf?referrer_access_token=6OFEoP9QqARIozyOn-mfHIta6bR2k8jH0KrdpFOxC64x6MvrC4nV5clWHS7liPoOukKBUnDSlIVRILRsjoNCxKDw33QBRnFvc54lShOayayl26WdIh-8yeWdYUmJ8_zAAlFCgiweAle8WpTXlINSDEce9SXGaesXln7bBO2p4sNQ9d--3joXD86U8HTgz51kgvwq3hD8bngbIoGdWjNCN9okZ9niVADxLlIitDfWAueUsmCFu7yMoo6Qe_wy-xII_J4UBEN_dKe0XotpvqrWCM2LlrRwd1vauZj26AulzsIg-d34e3wJD0OIakMiay_V)
in treating mild to moderate depression (and with side effects like
improved health and weight management rather than bloating and sexual
dysfunction). In countries such as Australia, United Kingdom, and the
Netherlands, official guidelines include exercise as a first-line
treatment for depression. Although U.S. guidelines have yet to change,
at least one psychotherapist, Sepideh Saremi in Los Angeles, California,
conducts [on-the-run
sessions](https://www.runnersworld.com/general-interest/this-therapist-takes-her-sessions-off-the-couch-and-onto-the-roads)
with willing patients.

How does moving the body change the mind? A growing body of work—both in
the lab and with patients—shows that there’s more to it than endorphins,
the well-known opioid the body produces during certain activities,
including exercise. The emerging, more sophisticated view of running to
improve mental health also takes into account long-term structural
changes in the brain as well as subjective states like mood and
cognition. Science continues working to explain the theory behind what
we runners already know from practice.

#### Think Different

![dropcap](https://www.runnersworld.com/sites/runnersworld.com/files/dropcaps2/dropcaps2/u.svg)[nlike
many with the condition]{.leadin}, I’ve never been majorly incapacitated
by depression. Most people would consider me productive, accomplished,
perhaps even energetic, given that my lifetime running odometer is past
110,000 miles. My dysthymia has two main components: *weltschmerz*, a
German word meaning sadness about how reality doesn’t live up to one’s
hopes, and anhedonia, a diminished ability to experience pleasure. Life
often feels like waiting out a series of not-horrible, not-fun
obligations. Things sometimes seem so pointless that I watch myself not
caring that I don’t care. For example, I once received a group email
that a book I’d coauthored had made *The* *New York Times* best seller
list. That’s a big deal in publishing. As if from outside, I observed
myself writing an exclamation-point-filled reply-all response thanking
and congratulating those of us who worked on the book. As I typed I
thought, “Yeah, fine, whatever. Is this really going to lift life above
2 p.m. on a gray Tuesday in March?”

That it’s possible to be outwardly active but internally askew can mask
just how common depression and anxiety are. In any one year, about 10
percent of the U.S. population would meet the diagnostic criteria for
depression, and about 20 percent for anxiety. (The two often coexist.)
The incidence of those conditions in the running population is probably
similar; [a 2017 review of research published in the *British Journal of
Sports
Medicine*](http://bjsm.bmj.com/content/early/2017/03/02/bjsports-2016-096455)
found no difference in depressive symptoms between what the researchers
called “high-performance athletes” and nonathletes. All levels of
runners are affected, with elites such as Olympian Adam Goucher and
Western States 100-mile champions Rob Krar and Nikki Kimball having
spoken publicly about their depression.

Of course, everybody gets sad and worried at times. What distinguishes
those feelings from clinical depression and anxiety? In the short term,
therapists often look for significant changes in emotions, behavior, and
psychological functioning. They also focus on how symptoms such as
feeling agitated, threatened, and uncomfortable (for anxiety) or
joyless, lethargic, and apathetic (for depression) interfere with
people’s everyday functioning. “I look at how these things affect
activities of daily living, like sleeping, going to work, interpersonal
relationships,” says Franklin Brooks, Ph.D., a clinical social worker in
Portland, Maine. “There’s a profound difference between ‘I’m having a
bad day at work’ and ‘I’m having a bad day at work and I’m not going to
get out of bed tomorrow because of it.’”

That classic depiction of depression sounds like what Amelia Gapin, 34,
a software engineer and marathoner from Jersey City, New Jersey, has
experienced. “I’ve had episodes where, for six weeks, two months, I
couldn’t even get myself out of bed,” she says. “During the weekends it
was wake up and take a couple hours to move myself to the couch.”

Ian Kellogg, 22, a 14:43 PR 5K college runner at Otterbein University in
Westerville, Ohio, says, “When I fall into depression, I more often than
not don’t run. I can’t find the energy or willpower to get out the door,
even though I know my training is suffering and that just half an hour
will make me feel better.”

Pati Haaz, 42, also knows this form of depression but was able to use
running to overcome it. In June 2015, the finance professional from
Kendall Park, New Jersey, had a miscarriage while two months pregnant.
She became severely depressed and started missing work. “I didn’t want
to get out of bed, I didn’t want to go out of my house,” she says. “It
was that feeling that there’s no point in continuing. I had no
motivation to do anything other than take care of my kids, which was
more an automatic duty.” Guilt over being depressed—“feeling like I’m
the worst mother in the world”—compounded the situation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### “When I’m running, the thoughts come in and out, and I’m not worried.”

###### –Cecilia Bidwell


Haaz started seeing a therapist who asked about Haaz’s pre-depression
hobbies. Haaz said that she was a runner who, before becoming pregnant,
had planned to run her first marathon that fall in New York City. The
therapist encouraged her to resume running. Haaz decided she needed the
goal of finishing a marathon to overcome the inertia that depression had
introduced to her life.

She found that marathon training helped in two key ways. “If I was
running for the sake of running, I would have stopped with my normal
six-mile run,” Haaz says. “But I was doing 16, 18, 20 miles, things I’d
never done before. I was able to carry this sense of accomplishment into
other areas.”

Even her shortest runs helped Haaz think differently. “If I was driving
or working or waking up in the middle of the night and thinking about
the things that were making me sad, it would just make things worse—it
would become like a spiral, and there was no end to it. But when I was
running, I would think about those same things, and somehow I was able
to process them differently. I would start my run with all these
negative thoughts, and after a mile or two, they were gone.” Five months
after her miscarriage, Haaz finished New York City in 6:38.

Reframing ruminations—thinking differently about hashed-over topics—is
one of the main appeals of running for those of us with mental health
issues. Cecilia Bidwell, 42, an attorney from Tampa, Florida, who has
anxiety, puts it this way: “When I’m running, the thoughts come in and
out, and I’m not worried,” she says. “I can think about things
objectively. I realize that things that I’m thinking are a huge deal
aren’t a big deal in the scheme of things.” The effect carries through
Bidwell’s stressful work days. “When I’ve gone for a good run in the
morning, if things are going haywire at 2 p.m. I’m handling them a lot
better. I’m not creating crises and wondering, ‘Why am I here?’”

The more-immediate cognitive focus of a typical run also contributes to
its efficacy. “When we’re overwhelmed with anxiety and depression,
shifting from the big picture—all the frustrations, worst-case scenario
thinking—to the small, in-the-moment task of doing something that
approaches a goal, like running a four-mile loop with two hills, will
kick off a positive feedback loop that continues throughout the run and
takes our thinking and emotions out of the trench of negativity,” says
Laura Fredendall, Psy.D.

These changes in mood and thinking are more accessible for runners. [In
a 2008 study published in the *Archives of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18226663),
ultramarathoners, moderate regular exercisers, and non-exercisers walked
or ran for 30 minutes at a self-selected pace that felt somewhat hard.
After the workout, everyone’s mood had improved, but that of the
ultramarathoners and moderate exercisers did so about twice as much as
that of the sedentary people. Also, the ultrarunners and regular
exercisers reported greater vigor and less fatigue after the workout
than before, while the non-exercisers felt the same.

The reason is that runners can hold a good pace for a long time without
going anaerobic, and that allows the physiological processes that lead
to improved mood, according to Panteleimon Ekkekakis, Ph.D., a professor
at Iowa State University who is a leading figure in the field of
exercise psychology. “In sedentary folks, their ventilatory
threshold—the point where exercise is no longer purely aerobic—is very
low,” he says. “So they get up off the couch, they take a few steps,
they’re already above their ventilatory threshold. If you’re a regular
runner, you have the cardiorespiratory fitness to sustain an exercise
intensity that’s associated with a feel-better effect.”


![\#](https://www.runnersworld.com/sites/runnersworld.com/files/depression1.jpg)

Left: Photo by MarathonFoto / Right: Photo by James Farrell

Pati Haaz overcame post-miscarriage depression by training for the New
York City Marathon. Amelia Gapin’s daily runs provide reprieve from
depressive rumination.

#### My Chemical Romance 

![dropcap](https://www.runnersworld.com/sites/runnersworld.com/files/dropcaps/dropcaps/w.svg)[hat
causes that feel-better effect?]{.leadin} Although the quick answer is
usually endorphins, they’re not the only relevant aspect of brain
chemistry. What’s more, focusing on the nebulous “runner’s high” ignores
crucial changes in brain structure and thinking patterns that running
can induce.

Endorphins entered the runner’s lexicon in the 1970s. That’s when it
became known that these chemicals, which bind to neuron receptors in the
brain, are released at higher levels during a run. Several studies found
that higher blood levels of postrun endorphins correlated to improved
mood. In terms of the brain, however, a strong correlation between
endorphin levels and improved mood [wasn’t demonstrated until
2008](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/5556660_The_Runner%27s_High_Opioidergic_Mechanisms_in_the_Human_Brain).
German researchers used PET scans, an imaging study often used to check
for cancer, on triathletes’ brains while the athletes ran for two hours.
They found high levels of endorphins in the prefrontal cortex and other
parts of the brain associated with mood, and that these levels aligned
with the athletes’ reports of euphoria.

But endorphins aren’t everything. As part of his research into human
evolution, David Raichlen, Ph.D., a professor of anthropology at the
University of Arizona, has measured pre- and postrun endocannabinoid
levels in [runners, dogs, and
ferrets](http://jeb.biologists.org/content/215/8/1331). Endocannabinoids
are substances that bind to the same receptors in the brain as THC, the
primary substance responsible for a marijuana high.

Raichlen says there are two leading theories on why running causes
increased levels of endorphins and endocannabinoids. First, when humans
became hunter/gatherers close to 2 million years ago, they became more
active; the release of these chemicals, which act as pain relievers, may
have evolved to allow longer, faster movement. In this scenario, the
feel-good aspect is a byproduct. Second, higher levels of these
chemicals while active could have motivated continued movement, which
would lead to getting more food and ultimately higher survival rates.
Raichlen says the two mechanisms might have worked in tandem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Regular running produces the same brain changes that are thought to be behind the effectiveness of anti-depressants.

Whatever the original mechanism for these evolutionary adaptations,
they’re especially helpful for modern runners with mental-health issues.
It’s nice to run for an hour and go from being in a good-enough mood to
a better one. It’s a fundamental shift to go from being miserable to
content, thanks to an infusion of feel-good substances. “I’ll finish a
run and be like, ‘Wow, this is how most people feel all the time,’”
Bidwell says.

A short-term mood boost thanks to endorphins and endocannibinoids is one
thing. (Granted, one much-appreciated thing.) But where running really
helps with mental health is over time, thanks to a change in brain
structure. [A review of research published in *Clinical Psychology
Review*](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.454.814&rep=rep1&type=pdf)
concluded “exercise training recruits a process which confers enduring
resilience to stress.” This appears to occur because regular running
produces the same two changes that are thought to be responsible for the
effectiveness of anti-depressants: increased levels of the
neurotransmitters serotonin and norepinephrine, and neurogenesis, or the
creation of new neurons.

Neurogenesis occurs primarily due to a protein called brain-derived
neurotrophic factor, which has been been called the Miracle-Gro of the
brain. “It helps neurons fire and wire together,” Fredendall says. Much
of this happens in the hippocampus, an area of the brain that’s often
shrunken in people with depression. “MRI scans have shown that even
after a six-month exercise intervention, there’s a visible increase in
the size of the hippocampus,” Ekkekakis says.

As Ekkekakis notes, you have to be fit to really get the daily benefits
that can lead to structural changes. Of course, you also have to get
yourself out the door, which can be especially difficult if you’re
depressed. But success in running on an especially tough day makes it
easier to get out the next time. And it can spur another key mental
health benefit of running.

#### I Think I Can, I Think I Can

![dropcap](https://www.runnersworld.com/sites/runnersworld.com/files/dropcaps/dropcaps/l.svg)[evels
of chemicals in the]{.leadin} brain are only part of your mental state.
There’s also cognition, or mental processes. Cognition includes not just
straightforward thinking (“I should run long today because a blizzard is
coming tomorrow”) but also more involved phenomena, such as how you
think about your thoughts.

A hallmark of depression is self-defeating, absolutist
thinking—“everything is harder than it should be,” “there’s no pleasure
in my life,” “it’s always going to be like this.” I’ve learned that
lacing up and hitting the roads is my best way to break free from such
thoughts. On a daily basis, running reminds me that I can overcome
apathy and torpor. Seeing that small victory, I can convince myself that
progress is possible on meeting professional goals, or not feeling
lonely so often, or figuring out how to afford retirement. “The
subjective experience of seeing yourself do something can make you feel
better,” Fredendall says.

Ekkekakis says cognition is key to understanding another aspect of
running’s effectiveness. “If you take anti-depressants and they make you
feel better, the psychological attribution is external—the patients
believe that the reason they get better is because of the drug they
take,” he says. “With exercise, the attribution is internal—the reason I
get better is that I’m doing this thing, I’m putting in the effort.
That’s where perhaps the additional benefit of exercise compared to
anti-depressants lies—that sense of empowerment, that sense that I’m
taking control of my situation.”

![\#](https://www.runnersworld.com/sites/runnersworld.com/files/depression2.jpg)

Photo by Alex Aristei

Even elite runners like two-time Western States 100-mile winner Rob Krar
use running to manage their mental health.

#### You Don’t Hear About the Golfer’s High 

![dropcap](https://www.runnersworld.com/sites/runnersworld.com/files/dropcaps/dropcaps/i.svg)[s
there something uniquely effective]{.leading} about running for managing
mental health? Or can any form of exercise provide similar relief?

The short answer is nobody knows for sure, and definitive research
comparing the mood-boosting properties of various ways of working out is
unlikely. “Such a study would have multiple arms—optimal intensity,
duration, or frequency of different forms of exercise—so you go from a
study costing \$1 million to \$3 million,” Ekkekakis says. “The
pharmaceutical companies fund their own studies, but who is going to
fund the exercise studies? The amount of government funding available is
simply not at that level.” ([According to the World Health
Organization](http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2017/world-health-day/en/),
depression is the leading cause of disability and poor health worldwide,
but on average only 3 percent of government health budgets is spent on
mental-health issues.)

It is safe to say that purposeful exercise is better than incidental
physical activity. [A study published in *Medicine & Science in Sports &
Exercise*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27824691) found improved
mood in people after they worked out, but not after daily-living
activities such as climbing stairs. Aerobic exercise seems more
effective than something like lifting weights. In fact, [a review of
research published in *Preventive
Medicine*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/m/pubmed/27765659/?i=2&from=exercise%20fitness)
found that people with low levels of cardiovascular fitness were at
greater risk of developing depression.

When I asked Raichlen about running compared to other activities, he
began by citing more studies on endocannabinoids and talking about
“mechanical pain” and “analgesic triggers.” Then the practical runner in
him took over.

“It’s much easier to get yourself into a reasonable intensity compared
to a lot of other sports,” he says. “It’s not too difficult to get in
the right zone and stay there. You have a lot more control over your
speed than even in something like cycling, where your effort level is
more dictated by the topography or even stop lights.”

“I’ve dabbled with triathlons a little,” says Rich Harfst, 54, a federal
government employee and marathoner from Annandale, Virginia, who was
diagnosed with depression as a teenager. “I’ve done yoga, I’ve done
cycling. Nothing is the same as running.” Ultrarunner Krar, who also
mountain bikes and competes in ski mountaineering, says, “Running is
that perfect balance where you can push yourself as hard as you like and
more easily get in that flow state.” Bidwell says that when she doesn’t
run, her anxiety puts her basic state at a 4 out of 10. “Running
normally gets me to an 8,” she says. “When I’m hurt and swim instead,
I’m at 6.”

That’s been my experience over the last nearly four decades. When I’ve
been injured and switch to cycling or pool running, the workouts
themselves are like proverbial castor oil—I do them because I know I
need them, not because they’re enjoyable in themselves. The net that
keeps me from plummeting starts to fray and sag.

But when running is going well, the net is taut and strong. A few times
a month, usually while cruising along a wooded trail speckled with
morning light, I’m overcome with a sensation best articulated as simply
“yes.” Yes to the moment, yes to whatever is in store the rest of the
day, yes to life itself. If I could bottle that feeling, I’d eventually
forget what it’s like to be depressed.

#### When Running’s Not Enough

##### Exercise is one therapy, but don’t overlook other measures.

Many people can manage their depression or anxiety solely through
running. But it’s neither a failure of running nor the runner to
consider additional treatment. Just as a well-rounded training program
includes elements that build on one another, [some studies have found
better outcomes](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27164293) when
exercise is combined with traditional therapy, such as talk therapy or
medication.

“I think it comes down to how well you’re functioning,” says
psychiatrist Brian Vasey, M.D. “Are you able to do what you need to do
and experience life to the depths that you would hope just with
running?”

The best approach to treatment can change over time, especially in the
context of life events. “If I’m having trouble with work and my mother
just died and I’m not running because I have an injury, that could lead
to brief periods of symptoms that might merit extra measures,” Vasey
says.

If you’re considering medication, be aware that the intersection of
running and anti-depressants is a complex topic. Studies on medication
and exercise performance are usually short-term and often involve
subjects who, in daily life, wouldn’t be prescribed anti-depressants. In
general, the research finds [no
boost](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11510868) in or detriment to
performance.

Anecdotally, runners report a range of responses, underlying the old
experiment-of-one adage. I lost interest in pushing that last few
percent in races after going on an anti-depressant; at this point in my
running life, the tradeoff is worth it. Others find their running
reborn, thanks to renewed energy and better overall functioning. Discuss
side effects that could affect your running, such as weight gain or
loss, dry mouth, and drowsiness, with your doctor.

Training through injury because you’re afraid of becoming depressed or
anxious indicates that you’re overly reliant on running to manage your
mental health, says psychiatrist Laura Fredendall. “That would be a sign
that there’s something going on that’s worth looking at,” she says.

#### Get in the Mood

##### Research and runners’ experiences offer guidance on how best to get a postrun boost.

[Duration:]{} Most studies find significant mood boosts after 30 minutes
of running. But any run is almost always better than no run; avoid
all-or-nothing thinking. “In the past if I haven’t been able to get done
exactly what I wanted to get done, I’d consider myself a failure,” says
elite ultramarathoner Rob Krar. “Now I’m more willing to say, ‘I’m not
going to be able to do that long run and I might miss my mileage for the
week, but I’m going to get my ass out the door for a four-miler.’” On
tough mental days, start your run with a flexible route that you can
shorten or lengthen as feels best.

[Intensity:]{} Endocannabinoids are neurotransmitters associated with
postrun mood improvements. [When David Raichlen had runners do 30-minute
workouts](http://www.raichlen.arizona.edu/DavePDF/RaichlenEtAl2013.pdf)
at four effort levels, he found the greatest increase in endocannabinoid
levels after runs at 70 percent of maximum heart rate (which translates
to jogging pace) and 80 percent of heart rate max (running at a steady,
conversational pace). Endocannabinoid levels decreased after Raichlen’s
runners sustained 50 percent max heart rate (walking) or ran for half an
hour at 90 percent of max heart rate (close to 5K race pace for many
runners).

But as Raichlen himself says, “My biggest mood boosts are after tempo
runs or intervals.” Remember that there’s more to mood than the levels
of any one brain chemical. Pushing yourself through a hard workout can
provide a needed sense of setting and accomplishing a goal. It’s then
often possible to apply that mindset to other areas of your life when
things feel overwhelming.

If you’re struggling to get out the door, give yourself permission to
run as slowly as you want. [A study published in *Medicine & Science in
Sports & Exercise*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28319590) found
that symptoms of depression improved more when the subjects worked out
at a self-selected intensity compared to exercising at a prescribed
moderate intensity.

[Setting:]{} A lot of research has been done in recent years on the
psychological response to exercise in various environments—forests,
urban parks, city streets, indoors, etc. “It appears that green spaces
have a much more beneficial impact,” Raichlen says. Indeed, [a study
published in *Social Science &
Medicine*](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22705180) found that
people who were frequently active in forests had about half the risk of
poor mental health as people who didn’t regularly play in the woods.

For any one run, people usually report better mood improvement (more
tranquility, greater reduction in stress, anxiety, and depression) in
natural settings compared to populated human-made environments. [A
review of research published in *Environmental Science &
Technology*](http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/es903183r) found that
green-space boosts were even greater when there was a water view.

Another chit in nature’s favor: [In one
study](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030439401100913X),
when cyclists rode a busy urban route with moderate air pollution, their
levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) didn’t rise, in
contrast to when they rode in a nonpolluted setting. BDNF is a protein
that’s associated with exercise-induced improvements in brain function.

Contributing editor Scott Douglas’s book *Running Is My Therapy*, which
will be published in April, is [available for
pre-order](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1615194444/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=runnersworld06-20&linkCode=xm2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1615194444&ascsubtag=%5BASIN%7C1615194444%5Bnid%7C2199386%5Bvid%7C2289226%5Bbrand%7CRW%5Butm%7C).

Copyright © 2017 Rodale Inc. No reproduction, transmission or display is
permitted without the written permissions of Rodale Inc.

Subscribe to Runner’s World for great stories and the planet’s best
running advice.

###### [Subscribe](https://secure.runnersworld.com/offer/601335?keycode=I7AW0D6F&utm_source=runnersworld.com&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=Hambgr&utm_content=RWD&utm_term=Jan17SiteHamburger)

