Jenn Shelton
============

### [Joining the coaching team at Trails and Tarmac](http://trailsandtarmac.com/coach-jenn-shelton/)

Trails and Tarmac is very excited to be bringing on Jenn Shelton as our
newest running coach. To say that Jenn is highly experienced in all
running disciplines would be an understatement. She has competed in
short fast races on the track, run grueling 100 milers all over the
world, she’s covered 220 miles of the hardest high mountain trail
America has to offer, and she’s qualified for the US Olympic marathons
trials. This only touches this tip of the iceberg.

There is no doubt Jenn has  a wealth of knowledge and experience hardly
matched in the sport of running. But more than her personal running
Jenn’s enthusiasm for running, her zest for life are second to none.
Through injury and triumph her spirit rarely loses its luster and this
characteristic shines through in her coaching and the athletes she has
worked with. A relationship with your running coach is far more than
just about the minutes and miles. Bringing Jenn into the fold of Trails
and Tarmac was a no brainer as she not only has the technical ability to
work with a diverse group of athletes but her fervor will motivate and
encourage everyone who has the opportunity to work with her.

We’ve asked Jenn to answer a few questions so that you can get to know
her a little better and see if her coaching style is right for you. If
you are interested in getting in touch with us at Trails and Tarmac and
to see about the possibility of working with Jenn as your coach you can
fill out this[questionnaire](https://goo.gl/forms/vDOTUyOgoOCRLuSa2).

**T&T**[: *What types of things have you brought over to trail running
that you learned while running cross country, track, and road
races? *]{style="font-weight: 400;"}

**JS: **I have beef with the term trail running.  Trail running is too
broad of a term.  It is an esoteric term and lacks specificity.  To many
people, being a trail runner is more of a perceived state of mind than
it is about the type of running that they actually do.  When someone
tells me they are a trail runner, it is like they are telling me that
their favorite color is green, or that their favorite wine is Rosé.
 While interesting, this label “trail runner” gives me no information in
terms of what they do or how they train.

Look at the body of a 100 meter runner.  Now consider the body of a
1500m runner.  These are both “track” athletes, but obviously, these two
athletes train differently.  Very differently.  A 1500m runner would
never be expected to be competitive in a 100 meter race and vice versa.
 This is simply not a fair expectation.  Yet people hold this
expectation in “trail running.”

In many circles, a trail runner who runs well at the Chuckanut 50km race
at sea level in Bellingham, is also expected to win the Hardrock 100
Mile Endurance run 4 months later in the San Juan mountains.  This is a
misconception in our sport.  This is because the term “trail running”
holds a lack of specificity.

Trail running encompasses mountain races, technical races, hot races,
snowy races and races of distances ranging from 10km to 100 miles.  You
can train the body to do well in all of them, but you can’t have it all,
or at least not all at once.  Each season you need to choose what type
of running you want to excel at, and then train specifically for that
goal.

Long story short, running cross country, track and road races has taught
me that specificity is key.  It has taught me that athletes and coaches
should commit to a specific goal, and then hunt down that goal with
hyper focus, and to hell with all the rest.  Sure, sometimes being in
good shape for 100 miles will make you faster in other forms of running.
 But this is just the cherry on top.  We need to love ourselves and
respect our goals.  We should never expect to be the best at everything
all the time.

**T&T: ***[What do you think has kept you running and training for so
many years now? ]{style="font-weight: 400;"}*

**JS: **I like to tease that ten years ago I lived and trained in a
bubble of hot shot runners:  Anton Krupicka, Kyle and Erik Skaggs and
myself. From our little gang of up-and-comers, I’m the only one still
running competitively and consistently,if at all.

[I tell these boys that instead of being Boy Scouts, stressing over
living a monastic life that they envisioned for a “serious athlete,”
they should have instead stayed out drinking and partying with me
throughout their twenties, sleeping in with hangovers and learning how
to relax.  Had they done this they wouldn’t have all run their bodies
into the ground.  This is of course not true but I like to rile them up
and—like all good provocative statements–there is a kernel of truth in
it.]{style="font-weight: 400;"}

The kernel is this:  training is nothing without recovery.  It literally
doesn’t matter what you do in training, if your body doesn’t recover
from that training.  If you just pile workouts on top of each other,
without letting your body rebuild itself after each workout, then you
aren’t training. It might look like training.  It might make for a sexy
Instagram account, but it is nothing more than systematically sinking
your own ship.

Workouts are not the most important part of training.  Recovery is the
most important part of training, and it comes in many forms.  Sleep is a
big one of those.  Nutrition becomes more and more important the older
you get.  And sometimes the most important thing you can do for your
training is to calm the fuck down and let loose have fun.

Stress kills. Cortisone, the stress hormone, kills.   I try to stress
the hell out of my body in my workouts, then I do my best to eliminate
stress from my life in between workouts.  Easier said than done, but
it’s a good business model for longevity.  And for a happy life.

**T&T:* ****[What advice would you give to trail runners looking to
improve their speed?]**

JS: Early in my career Deena Kastor (American record holder in the
marathon: 2:19:36) gave me three pieces of advice.

1.  [Drink two glasses of water every morning.]
2.  [Never buy store bought marshmallows.  Make your own.  It’s healthier, it impresses people helps you get laid (I might have fabricated that reason in my head over the years) and friends are more likely to have a bonfire with you.]
3.  [Do strides after every run.]

For my answer to this question, I am recycling this advice.  All are
important, but number three should be adhered to religiously.  I can’t
stress the importance of strides for developing speed enough.

**T&T **[*As a coach are you reserved and laid back with your runners or
a total hard ass?* ]{style="font-weight: 400;"}

**JS: **I’m not a drill sergeant. If someone is taking the time to be
coached, I give them the benefit of the doubt that they are giving their
best.

If an athlete is not fulfilling their commitments to their training
program, I consider this a failure on my part as a coach.  If an athlete
can’t finish a workout, or doesn’t have the motivation to get out the
door, it is rarely because they are lazy.  We must take a step away and
look at why.  Notice I didn’t say a step backward.

Fatigue is not a sign of failure.  Long term fatigue is a sign of
failure–and apathy is a sign of being overwhelmed by the workload
without seeing results–but total body fatigue, in many phases of
training, is a necessary step that happens right before big leaps
forward in fitness.  Not every day is going to feel fresh and easy, like
you’re floating through an Olympic final.  If it did, none of us would
need coaches.

[It’s my job as a coach to help you not freak out when you are tired and
the workload feels difficult.  It’s my job to help you learn the phases
of training, and to help you get excited about the how the body is
responding to each phase.  The body is a machine.  It’s fun to watch it
work and recover and work and recover and get stronger and
stronger.]{style="font-weight: 400;"}So no, I’m not a hard ass.  But I’m
going to challenge my athletes, and they are going to work hard, albeit
in a controlled and fun environment. Because getting faster and fitter
is work, but it is fun work.

**T&T: ***[Anything else you like to add?]{style="font-weight: 400;"}*

[**JS: **Train hard and be nice.  It’s the best advice I’ve
received.]{style="font-weight: 400;"}

**T&T: **If you are interested in the possibility of working with Jenn
as your coach or with any of the other Trails and Tarmac staff get in
touch [here](https://goo.gl/forms/vDOTUyOgoOCRLuSa2) by filling out the
questionnaire. Or you can send an email with your contact info and a
little bit about you and your running to info@trailsandtarmac.com

Posted April 21st, 2017 by Ryan Ghelfi\

Tags: [Coach Jenn
Shelton](http://trailsandtarmac.com/tag/coach-jenn-shelton/), [Jenn
Shelton](http://trailsandtarmac.com/tag/jenn-shelton/), [running
coach](http://trailsandtarmac.com/tag/running-coach/), [Trail Running
Coach](http://trailsandtarmac.com/tag/trail-running-coach/)

**Get in touch**\
<info@trailsandtarmac.com> {#get-in-touch-infotrailsandtarmac.com style="margin-top: 64px; margin-bottom: 0; line-height: 1.2em;"}
--------------------------

© 2018 Trails & Tarmac.

Site by [KEVIN JANTZER](http://kevinjantzer.com)
