tl,dr :::  We all go a little insane when we get in a group larger than **the Monkeysphere**. 

> That\'s why you get that weird feeling of anonymous invincibility when you\'re sitting in a large crowd, screaming curses at a football player you\'d never dare say to his face.

# What is the Monkeysphere? \| Cracked.com

##### **CONNECT WITH CRACKED**

Copyright Â© 2005-2016\
Cracked is published by Literally Media Ltd.,

::: {.intro}
\"One death is a tragedy. One million deaths is a statistic.\"\
-*Kevin Federline*

What do monkeys have to do with war, oppression, crime, racism and even
e-mail spam? You\'ll see that all of the random ass-headed cruelty of
the world will suddenly make perfect sense once we go **Inside the
Monkeysphere.**

## \"What the Hell is the Monkeysphere?\" {#what-the-hell-is-the-monkeysphere .subheading}

First, picture a monkey. A monkey dressed like a little pirate, if that
helps you. We\'ll call him Slappy.

Imagine you have Slappy as a pet. Imagine a personality for him. Maybe
you and he have little pirate monkey adventures and maybe even join up
to fight crime. Think how sad you\'d be if Slappy died.

Now, imagine you get four more monkeys. We\'ll call them Tito, Bubbles,
Marcel and ShitTosser. Imagine personalities for each of them now. Maybe
one is aggressive, one is affectionate, one is quiet, the other just
throws shit all the time. But they\'re all your personal monkey friends.

Now imagine a hundred monkeys.

Not so easy now, is it? So how many monkeys would you have to own before
you couldn\'t remember their names? At what point, in your mind, do your
beloved pets become just a faceless sea of monkey? Even though each one
is every bit the monkey Slappy was, there\'s a certain point where *you
will no longer really care if one of them dies.*

So how many monkeys would it take before you stopped caring?

That\'s not a rhetorical question. We actually know the number.

## \"So this whole thing is your crusade against monkey overpopulation? I\'ll have my monkey castrated this very day!\" {#so-this-whole-thing-is-your-crusade-against-monkey-overpopulation-ill-have-my-monkey-castrated-this-very-day .subheading}

Uh, no. It\'ll become clear in a moment.

You see, monkey experts performed a [**monkey
study**](http://www.liv.ac.uk/researchintelligence/issue17/brainteaser.html)
a while back, and discovered that the size of the monkey\'s monkey brain
determined the size of the monkey groups the monkeys formed. The bigger
the brain, the bigger the little societies they built.

They cut up so many monkey brains, in fact, that they found they could
actually take a brain they had never seen before and from it they could
accurately predict what size tribes that species of creature formed.

Most monkeys operate in troupes of 50 or so. But somebody slipped them a
slightly larger brain and they estimated the ideal group or society for
*this* particular animal was about **150**.

That brain, of course, was human. Probably from a homeless man they
snatched off the streets.

## \"So that\'s the big news? That humans are God\'s big-budget sequel to the monkey? Who didn\'t know that?\" {#so-thats-the-big-news-that-humans-are-gods-big-budget-sequel-to-the-monkey-who-didnt-know-that .subheading}

It goes much, much deeper than that. Let\'s try an example.

Famous news talking guy **Tim Russert** tells a charming story about his
father, in his book [**Big Russ and
Me**](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1401352081/qid=1086915307/sr=2-1/ref=sr_2_1/002-9941555-1980837){.b}
(the title referring to his on-and-off romance with actor **Russell
Crowe**). Russert\'s dad used to take half an hour to carefully box up
any broken glass before taking it to the trash. Why? Because \"The trash
guy might cut his hands.\"

That this was such an unusual thing to do illustrates my monkey point.
None of us spend much time worrying about the garbage man\'s welfare
even though he performs a crucial role in not forcing us to live in a
cave carved from a mountain of our own filth. We don\'t usually consider
his safety or comfort at all and if we do, it\'s not in the same way we
would worry over our best friend or wife or girlfriend or even *our
dog.*

People toss half-full bottles of drain cleaner right into the barrel,
without a second thought of what would happen if the trash man got it
splattered into his eyes. Why? Because the trash guy exists **outside
the Monkeysphere.**

## \"There\'s that word again\...\" {#theres-that-word-again... .subheading}

**The Monkeysphere** is the group of people who each of us, using our
monkeyish brains, are able to conceptualize as people. If the monkey
scientists are monkey right, it\'s physically impossible for this to be
a number much larger than **150**.

Most of us do not have room in **our Monkeysphere** for our friendly
neighborhood sanitation worker. So, we don\'t think of him as a person.
We think of him as The Thing That Makes The Trash Go Away.

And even if you happen to know and like your particular garbage man, at
one point or another we all have limits to our sphere of monkey concern.
It\'s the way our brains are built. We each have a certain circle of
people who we think of as people, usually our own friends and family and
neighbors, and then maybe some classmates or coworkers or church or
suicide cult.

Those who exist outside that core group of a few dozen people *are not
people to us.* They\'re sort of one-dimensional bit characters.

Remember the first time, as a kid, you met one of your school teachers
outside the classroom? Maybe you saw old Miss Puckerson at Taco Bell
eating refried beans through a straw, or saw your principal walking out
of a dildo shop. Do you remember that surreal feeling you had when you
saw these people *actually had lives outside the classroom?*

I mean, they\'re not *people*. They\'re *teachers.*

### Related:

[The 5 Strangest Ways Your Mind Can Get Your Body
Sick](https://www.cracked.com/article_19209_the-5-strangest-ways-your-mind-can-get-your-body-sick.html)

## \"So? What difference does all this make?\" {#so-what-difference-does-all-this-make .subheading}

Oh, not much. It\'s just **the one single reason society doesn\'t
work**.

It\'s like this: which would upset you more, your best friend dying, or
a dozen kids across town getting killed because their bus collided with
a truck hauling killer bees? Which would hit you harder, your Mom dying,
or seeing on the news that 15,000 people died in an earthquake in Iran?

They\'re all humans and they are all equally dead. But the closer to
**our Monkeysphere** they are, the more it means to us. Just as your
death won\'t mean anything to the Chinese or, for that matter, hardly
anyone else more than 100 feet or so from where you\'re sitting right
now.

## \"Why should I feel bad for them? I don\'t even *know* those people!\" {#why-should-i-feel-bad-for-them-i-dont-even-know-those-people .subheading}

Exactly. This is so ingrained that to even suggest you should feel their
deaths as deeply as that of your best friend sounds a little ridiculous.
We are hard-wired to have a drastic double standard for the people
inside **our Monkeysphere** versus the 99.999% of the world\'s
population who are on the outside.

Think about this the next time you get really pissed off in traffic,
when you start throwing finger gestures and wedging your head out of the
window to scream, \"LEARN TO FUCKING DRIVE, FUCKER!!\" Try to imagine
acting like that in a smaller group. Like if you\'re standing in an
elevator with two friends and a coworker, and the friend goes to hit a
button and accidentally punches the wrong one. Would you lean over, your
mouth two inches from her ear, and scream \"LEARN TO OPERATE THE FUCKING
ELEVATOR BUTTONS, SHITCAMEL!!\"

They\'d think you\'d gone insane. We all go a little insane, though,
when we get in a group larger than **the Monkeysphere**. That\'s why you
get that weird feeling of anonymous invincibility when you\'re sitting
in a large crowd, screaming curses at a football player you\'d never
dare say to his face.

## \"Well, I\'m nice to strangers. Have you considered that maybe you\'re just an asshole?\" {#well-im-nice-to-strangers.-have-you-considered-that-maybe-youre-just-an-asshole .subheading}

Sure, you probably don\'t go out of your way to be mean to strangers.
You don\'t go out of your way to be mean to stray dogs, either.

The problem is that eventually, the needs of you or those within **your
Monkeysphere** will require screwing someone outside it (even if that
need is just venting some tension and anger via exaggerated insults).
This is why most of us wouldn\'t dream of stealing money from the pocket
of the old lady next door, but don\'t mind stealing cable, adding a
shady exemption on our tax return, or quietly celebrating when they
forget to charge us for something at the restaurant.

You may have a list of rationalizations long enough to circle the Earth,
but the truth is that in our monkey brains the old woman next door is a
human being while the cable company is a big, cold, faceless machine.
That the company is, in reality, nothing but a group of people every bit
as human as the old lady, or that some kind old ladies actually work
there and would *lose their jobs* if enough cable were stolen, rarely
occurs to us.

That\'s one of the ingenious things about the big-time religions, by the
way. The old religious writers knew it was easier to put the screws to a
stranger, so they taught us to get a *personal* idea of a God in our
heads who says, \"No matter who you hurt, you\'re really hurting *me.*
Also, I can crush you like a grape.\" You must admit that if they
weren\'t writing words inspired by the Almighty, they at least
understood **the Monkeysphere**.

It\'s everywhere. Once you grasp the concept, you can see examples all
around you. You\'ll walk the streets in a daze, like **Roddy Piper**
after putting on his X-ray sunglasses in *They Live*.

But wait, because this gets much bigger and much, much stranger\...

## \"So you\'re going to tell us that this Monkeysphere thing runs the whole world? Also, *They Live* sucked.\" {#so-youre-going-to-tell-us-that-this-monkeysphere-thing-runs-the-whole-world-also-they-live-sucked. .subheading}

Go flip on the radio. Listen to the conservative talk about \"The
Government\" as if it were some huge, lurking dragon ready to eat you
and your paycheck whole. Never mind that the government *is made up of
people* and that all of that money they take goes into the pockets of
human beings. Talk radio\'s Rush Limbaugh is known to tip 50% at
restaurants, but flies into a broadcast tirade if even half that dollar
amount is deducted from his paycheck by \"The Government.\" That\'s
despite the fact that the money helps that very same single mom he had
no problem tipping in her capacity as a waitress.

Now click over to a liberal show now, listen to them describe
\"Multinational Corporations\" in the same diabolical terms, an evil
black force that belches smoke and poisons water and enslaves humanity.
Isn\'t it strange how, say, a lone man who carves and sells children\'s
toys in his basement is a sweetheart who just loves bringing joy at
Christmas, but a big-time toy corporation (which brings toys to
*millions* of kids at Christmas) is an inhuman soul-grinding greed
machine? Strangely enough, if the kindly lone toy making guy made enough
toys and hired enough people and expanded to enough shops, we\'d
eventually stop seeing it as a toy-making shop and start seeing it as
the fiery Orc factories of Mordor.

And if you\'ve just thought, \"Well, those talk show hosts are just a
bunch of egomaniacal blowhards anyway,\" you\'ve just done it again,
turned real humans into two-word cartoon characters. It\'s no surprise,
you do it with pretty much all six billion human beings outside **the
Monkeysphere**.

## \"So I\'m supposed to suddenly start worrying about six billion strangers? That\'s not even possible!\" {#so-im-supposed-to-suddenly-start-worrying-about-six-billion-strangers-thats-not-even-possible .subheading}

That\'s right, it isn\'t possible. That\'s the point.

What is hard to understand is that *it\'s also impossible for them to
care about you.*

That\'s why they don\'t mind stealing your stereo or vandalizing your
house or cutting your wages or raising your taxes or bombing your office
building or choking your computer with spam advertising diet and penis
drugs they know don\'t work. You\'re outside *their* **Monkeysphere**.
In their mind, you\'re just a vague shape with a pocket full of money
for the taking.

Think of Osama Bin Laden. Did you just picture a camouflaged man hiding
in a cave, drawing up suicide missions? Or are you thinking of a man who
gets hungry and has a favorite food and who had a childhood crush on a
girl and who has athlete\'s foot and chronic headaches and wakes up in
the morning with a boner and [loves
volleyball](http://www.cbc.ca/news/background/khadr/alqaedafamily3.html)?

Something in you, just now, probably was offended by that. You think
there\'s an effort to build sympathy for the murderous fuck. Isn\'t it
strange how simply knowing random human facts about him immediately tugs
at your sympathy strings? He comes closer to **your Monkeysphere**, he
takes on dimension.

Now, the cold truth is this Bin Laden is just as desperately in need of
a bullet to the skull as the raving four-color caricature on some
redneck\'s T-shirt. The key to understanding people like him, though, is
realizing that *we* are the caricature on *his* T-shirt.

## \"So you\'re using monkeys to claim that we\'re all a bunch of Osama Bin Ladens?\" {#so-youre-using-monkeys-to-claim-that-were-all-a-bunch-of-osama-bin-ladens .subheading}

Sort of.

Listen to any 16 year-old kid with his first job, going on and on about
how the boss is screwing him and the government is screwing him even
more (\"What\'s FICA?!?!\" he screams as he looks at his first
paycheck).

Then watch that same kid at work, as he drops a hamburger patty on the
floor, picks it up, and slaps in on a bun and serves it to a customer.

In that one dropped burger he has everything he needs to understand
those black-hearted politicians and corporate bosses. They see him in
the exact same way he sees the customers lined up at the burger counter.
Which is, just barely.

In both cases, for the guy making the burger and the guy running Exxon,
getting through the workweek and collecting the paycheck are all that
matters. No thought is given to the real human unhappiness being spread
by doing it shittily (ever gotten so sick from food poisoning you
thought your stomach lining was going to fly out of your mouth?) That
many customers or employees just can\'t fit inside **the Monkeysphere**.

The kid will protest that he shouldn\'t have to care for the customers
for minimum wage, but the truth is if a man doesn\'t feel sympathy for
his fellow man at \$6.00 an hour, he won\'t feel anything more at
\$600,000 a year.

Or, to look at it the other way, if we\'re allowed to be indifferent and
even resentful to the masses for \$6.00 an hour, just think of how angry
the some Pakistani man is allowed to be when he\'s making the equivalent
of six dollars *a week.*

## \"You\'ve used the word \'monkey\' more than 50 times, but the same principle hardly applies. Humans have been to the moon. Let\'s see the monkeys do that.\" {#youve-used-the-word-monkey-more-than-50-times-but-the-same-principle-hardly-applies.-humans-have-been-to-the-moon.-lets-see-the-monkeys-do-that. .subheading}

It doesn\'t matter. It\'s just an issue of degree.

There\'s a reason why legendary monkeytician Charles Darwin and his
assistant, Jeje (pronounced \"heyhey\") Santiago deduced that humans and
chimps were evolutionary cousins. As sophisticated as we are (compare
our advanced sewage treatment plants to the chimps\' primitive technique
of hurling the feces with their bare hands), the inescapable truth is we
are just as limited by our mental hardware.

The primary difference is that monkeys are happy to stay in small groups
and rarely interact with others outside their monkey gang. This is why
they rarely go to war, though when they do it is widely thought to be
hilarious. Humans, however, require cars and oil and quality
manufactured goods by the fine folks at 3M and Japanese video games and
worldwide internets and, most importantly, governments. All of these
things take groups larger than 150 people to maintain effectively. Thus,
we routinely find ourselves functioning in bunches larger than our
primate brains are able to cope with.

This is where the problems begin. Like a fragile naked human pyramid, we
are simultaneously supporting and resenting each other. We bitch out
loud about our soul-sucking job as an anonymous face on an assembly
line, while at the exact same time riding in a car that only an assembly
line could have produced. It\'s a constant contradiction that has left
us pissed off and joining informal wrestling clubs in basements.

This is why I think it was with a great burden of sadness that Darwin
turned to his assistant and lamented, \"Jeje, *we\'re* the monkeys.\"

## \"Oh, no you didn\'t.\" {#oh-no-you-didnt. .subheading}

If you think about it, our entire society has evolved around the
limitations of **the Monkeysphere**. There is a reason why all of the
really phat-ass nations with the biggest SUV\'s with the shiniest
22-inch rims all have some kind of representative democracy (where you
vote for people to do the governing for you) and all of them are, to
some degree, capitalist (where people actually get to buy property and
keep some of what they earn).

Above: Democracy

A representative democracy allows a small group of people to make all of
the decisions, while letting us common people feel like we\'re doing
something by going to a polling place every couple of years and pulling
a lever that, in reality, has about the same effect as the darkness knob
on your toaster. We can simultaneously feel like *we\'re* in charge
while being contained enough that we can\'t cause any real monkey mayhem
once we fly into one of our screeching, arm-flapping monkey frenzies
(\"A woman showed her boob at the Super Bowl! We want a boob and
football ban immediately!\")

Conversely, some people in the distant past naively thought they could
sit all of the millions of monkeys down and say, \"Okay, everybody go
pick the bananas, then bring them here, and we\'ll distribute them with
a complex formula determining banana need! Now go gather bananas for the
good of society!\" For the monkeys it was a confused, comical,
tree-humping disaster.

Later, a far more realistic man sat the monkeys down and said, \"You
want bananas? Each of you go get your own. I\'m taking a nap.\" That
man, of course, was German philosopher Hans Capitalism.

As long as everybody gets their own bananas and shares with the few in
**their Monkeysphere**, the system will thrive *even though nobody is
even trying to make the system thrive*. This is perhaps how Ayn Rand
would have put it, had she not been such a hateful bitch.

Then, some time in the Third Century, French philosopher Pierre
\"Frenchy\" LaFrench invented racism.

\
Above: The French

This was a way of simplifying the too-complex-for-monkeys world by
imagining all people of a certain race as being *the same person*,
thinking they all have the same attitudes and mannerisms and tastes in
food and clothes and music. It sort of works, as long as we think of
that person as being a *good* person (\"Those Asians are so hard-working
and precise and well-mannered!\") but when we start seeing them as being
one, giant, gaping asshole (the French, ironically) our monkey happiness
again breaks down.

It\'s not all the French\'s fault. The truth is, all of these monkey
management schemes only go so far. For instance, today [**one in four
Americans has some kind of mental
illness**](http://www.nimh.nih.gov/publicat/numbers.cfm){.b}, usually
depression. One in *four*. Watch a basketball game. The odds are at
least two of those people on the floor are mentally ill. Look around
your house; if everybody else there seems okay, *it\'s you.*

Is it any surprise? You turn on the news and see a whole special on the
Obesity Epidemic. You\'ve had this worry laid on your shoulders about
*millions of other people eating too much.* What exactly are you
supposed to do about the eating habits of 80 million people you don\'t
even know? You\'ve taken on the pork-laden burden of all these people
**outside the Monkeysphere** and you now carry that useless weight of
worry like, you know, some kind of animal on your back.

### Related:

[6 One-of-a-Kind Things You Won\'t Believe Had
Duplicates](https://www.cracked.com/article_19859_6-one-of-a-kind-things-you-wont-believe-had-duplicates.html)

## \"So what exactly are we supposed to do about all this?\" {#so-what-exactly-are-we-supposed-to-do-about-all-this .subheading}

First, train yourself to get suspicious every time you see simplicity.
Any claim that the root of a problem is simple should be treated the
same as a claim that the root of a problem is Bigfoot. Simplicity and
Bigfoot are found in the real world with about the same frequency.

So reject binary thinking of \"good vs. bad\" or \"us vs. them.\" Know
problems cannot be solved with clever slogans and over-simplified
step-by-step programs.

You can do that by following these simple steps. We like to call this
plan the **T.R.Y.** plan:

First, **[T]{.ul}OTAL MORON**. That is, accept the fact THAT YOU ARE
ONE. We all are.

That really annoying person you know, the one who\'s always spouting
bullshit, the person who always thinks they\'re right? Well, the odds
are that for somebody else, *you\'re that person*. So take the amount
you think you know, reduce it by 99.999%, and then you\'ll have an idea
of how much you actually know regarding things outside your
**Monkeysphere**.

Second, **UNDE[R]{.ul}STAND** that there are no Supermonkeys. Just
monkeys. Those guys on TV you see, giving the inspirational seminars,
teaching you how to reach your potential and become rich and successful
like them? You know how they made their money? **By giving seminars.**
For the most part, the only thing they do well is convince others they
do everything well.

No, the universal moron principal established in **No. 1** above applies
here, too. Don\'t pretend politicians are somehow supposed to be immune
to all the backhanded fuckery we all do in our daily lives and don\'t
laugh and point when the preacher gets caught on video snorting cocaine
off a prostitute\'s ass. A good exercise is to picture your
hero\--whoever it is\--passed out on his lawn, naked from the waist
down. The odds are it\'s happened at some point. Even Gandhi may have
had hotel rooms and dead hookers in his past.

And don\'t even *think* about ignoring advice from a moral teacher just
because the source enjoys the ol\' Colombian Nose Candy from time to
time. We\'re all members of varying species of hypocrite (or did you
tell them at the job interview that you once called in sick to spend a
day leveling up on **World of Warcraft**?) Don\'t use your heroes\'
vices as an excuse to let yours run wild.

And finally, **DON\'T LET ANYBOD[Y]{.ul}** simplify it for you. The
world cannot be made simple. Anyone who tries to paint a picture of the
world in basic comic book colors is most likely trying to use you as a
pawn.

So just remember: **T-R-Y**. Go forth and do likewise, gents. Copies of
our book are available in the lobby.

\

*David Wong is the editor of Cracked.com and the author of the
dong-filled horror novel [John Dies at the
End](http://amzn.com/031255513X).*

Copyright Â©2005-2021. Cracked is published by Literally Media Ltd.,
:::
